At the Dallas Pistol & Revolver Club in 1991, Trey Cooley, a young spectator, was watching a shooting competition, seated behind an air gun range.
Trey Cooley, a young spectator, was watching a shooting competition, seated behind an air gun range.
He was struck and killed by a stray bullet.
This is how ballistics, lasers, and forensic animation solved the riddle of the magic bullet.
14-year-old Trey Cooley.
Look at him, and you'll see the All-American boy.
Trey attended Boles Junior High School in Arlington, Texas, near Dallas.
He played cello in the school orchestra, played baseball, and was a Boy Scout.
At that age, every kid has the whole world open to him.
He could have done anything he wanted to do.
Most of all, he enjoyed spending time with his family.
Trey and his father, Butch, were best friends.
We did everything together.
September 29, 1991.
Butch Cooley woke early that Saturday morning-- --then went to wake Trey.
The two shared a passion for shooting.
Go or don't you want to go?
Butch was judging a competition.
He gave Trey a choice-- to sleep in or tag along.
Trey chose to go with his father.
Trey started shooting when he was seven.
He enjoyed it.
He shot his first deer when he was eight.
He wanted to be a pistol competitor.
And he was pretty good at it.
At the Dallas Pistol & Revolver Club, Trey volunteered to help out by running results from judges to the official scorer.
Trey volunteered to help out by running results from judges to the official scorer.
In between assignments, he sat in the air gun building to get out of the hot Texas sun.
He sat just inside the door near two women who were working as scorers, but behind people shooting air pistols-- nothing more than pellet and BB guns.
Then, a blood-curdling scream.
Trey Cooley slumped to the floor, blood flowing from his temple.
His baseball cap had a tiny but telltale hole.
Butch Cooley was outside the building, just a few yards from his son when he heard the screaming.
Although Butch Cooley spent 21 years as a state trooper and was trained to handle emergencies, no training could prepare him for what he saw next.
When I got there, I saw that he'd been shot.
I checked his pulse.
I knew it wasn't good.
Butch walked in, and I asked him, what are you doing home?
And I said, oh, where is Trey?
And then he came in. And he told me.
He said, um, there's been an accident.
And, um, I was thinking, you know, well, he's cut his foot, cut his hand, or broke his arm, you know.
And I said, well, it's OK.
He's-- he'll be OK.
Trey was rushed by ambulance to Parkland Memorial Hospital in Dallas.
He was just lying there.
Um, he was breathing, or the machine was breathing for him.
His little hands were so warm.
And he just looked like he was asleep.
Six hours later, Trey died.
I just wanted to tell him that I was very, very proud of him.
I loved him dearly.
My only son, my best friend, my fishing buddy, my hunting partner. Just a void.
Trey Cooley was seated in the club's designated safety area.
It was an accident that shouldn't have happened.
Detective Tom Pease and crime investigator David Taylor had a tough job-- to figure out where the bullet that killed Trey Cooley came from and to determine if the shooting was accidental or intentional.
Trey Cooley came from and to determine if the shooting was accidental or intentional.
Butch Cooley spent two decades as a state trooper.
Was it possible the shooting had something to do with an enemy he possibly made during his tenure?
Or had the bullet come from outside, from one of the outdoor shooting ranges, or possibly, the nearby railroad tracks where kids had a history of taking shots at the air gun building.
Uh, the biggest problem with this range or this scene was the size of it.
It wasn't contained inside a house, inside an apartment.
It was outside, and it covered several hundred feet.
The bullet removed from Trey's skull would provide some answers and raise new questions.
The bullet was small, about half an inch long, but lethal.
Larry Fletcher is the firearms expert who conducted the ballistics examination.
The bullet was not that damaged.
Uh, the bullet was, uh, ridden-- rather remarkable condition.
This is a .45 caliber bullet after striking a cement wall.
It is badly mangled, especially when compared to the bullet that killed Trey Cooley.
That lack of damage could be telling, except for one thing.
This was not a typical .45 caliber bullet.
This particular bullet is a hand-loaded or handmade bullet-- it's not a commercial-made bullet-- in which they could add other materials to the lead and make it much harder.
Uh, it can withstand a lot of damage, uh, upon impact.
Who makes and uses these types of bullets?
Butch Cooley knew.
Competitive shooters like to-- to load their own ammunition, uh, probably the reason being, uh, the cost savings.
Most of the competitive shooters on the outside ranges that day were using handmade bullets.
So there was little doubt that the bullet came from somewhere here rather than from kids on the railroad tracks.
Police collected the weapons and ammunition samples from the shooters in the competition.
When Larry Fletcher examined the bullets used that day on the outside ranges, he noticed something else.
The powder charge which, uh, increased the velocity of this particular type of bullet.
Basically, the shooters use bullets with more gunpowder.
More gunpowder means these bullets travel farther and faster than a regular .45 caliber bullet.
Fletcher's next task was to match the bullet that killed Trey to one of about a dozen guns.
Trey to one of about a dozen guns.
Each of the guns from the shooting competition were test fired and compared to the bullet taken from Trey Cooley's skull.
Fletcher had trouble getting an exact match because the extra gun powder created extremely high temperatures during the firing of the gun, actually melting some of the distinguishing marks.
But Fletcher noticed a red wax on the bullet that killed Trey.
All shooters use a lubricating wax, but only one of the guns used a red wax.
Larry Fletcher found the gun that fired the fatal shot.
At that point, I was pretty much convinced.
A pistol competitor named Dan Smith was using that gun on the day of the competition.
And he was firing on this outdoor range, just behind the air gun building.
But Smith told police he couldn't have fired the fatal shot.
He felt that all his shots had made the target, that there were no errant rounds.
But something just didn't add up to Butch Cooley.
He spent his entire life around guns and won awards for marksmanship and gun safety.
He knew shooting ranges are supposed to be safe.
Accidents aren't supposed to happen.
It just didn't make sense.
Police were satisfied that Trey Cooley's death was an accident.
The ballistics report said the fatal bullet came from a gun fired from an outdoor range during the competition.
The owner of the gun said he didn't miss a shot.
And the range was designed to contain any errant bullet.
First, there's a barrier between the air gun building and the firing range.
It's called a berm.
It's a small mountain of dirt, about 12 feet high.
The berm sits right behind the targets in the event a shooter misses either to the left or right.
Directly above the targets are a series of wooden planks, fastened end-to-end and side-by-side.
These are called baffles and they're designed to catch bullets fired a little high of the target before they leave the range.
Then there are two additional sets of baffles, one just a few yards in front of the firing line and another, called an eyebrow, directly over the firing line.
Ken Buster is a safety management consultant with years of experience as a shooter and with a special expertise in firing ranges.
Between the eyebrow, the baffles, and the height of the berm, the vast majority of any stray bullet would be stopped.
Safety should be the number 1 priority in everybody's mind anytime that you-- that you participate in marksmanship as a sport.
Something was wrong there.
Butch Cooley began a personal crusade to learn the truth.
He needed to know how a bullet could bypass the range's safety features and kill his only son.
Butch hired Attorney Mike Schmidt to find out where or if the safety system had failed.
Schmidt put together an investigative team.
Steve Irwin was the first member.
As an accident reconstructionist, his job is to create an exact computerized three-dimensional scale model of the air gun building and the firing ranges.
Using laser technology, precision measuring devices, and sophisticated computer programs, Irwin would also uncover the path of the bullet.
Irwin would also uncover the path of the bullet.
You wind up starting at, unfortunately, the-- the young boy getting shot, and then working your way backwards.
Police had already identified some important clues.
The outside wall of the air gun building was riddled with bullet holes from all angles.
Irwin needed to know exactly which one was the culprit.
Police also found bullet holes inside the building-- in a sheetrock strip to protect the lighting fixture and in a wall that separated the indoor range from a storage shed.
There was also a fresh gouge in an ordinary ceiling tile.
Irwin's laser survey equipment traced the bullet's path from where Trey was sitting through all those points-- from Trey through the sheetrock strip, off the ceiling tile, and through the back wall.
It seemed unlikely, but it matched the evidence.
It-- it was roughly a straight line.
But I couldn't see from the interior wall to the exterior wall.
And it-- it wasn't until we got it back to the office and got it mapped that-- that it formed this remarkably straight line.
A straight line that led directly to one of the bullet holes in the aluminum siding then down to the shooting range behind air gun building.
It led to the range where Dan Smith was shooting, but oddly enough, not to the firing line.
The laser pinpointed a path that landed 10 yards in front of the firing line.
10 yards in front of the firing line.
When Ken Buster was brought into the investigation, he immediately inspected the firing range to see if there was any way a bullet could get past all of the range's safety features.
Buster delivered a scathing report.
At the time and now, I still think that was the worst range that I have ever seen.
He found dozens of potentially deadly safety The berm separating the back range from the front range was not the standard height, which is supposed to be 20 feet.
The berm separating the back range from the front range was not the standard height, which is supposed to be 20 feet.
The berm behind the air gun building was only 12 feet high.
The baffles were far below standard.
The wooden planks should have had a steel or concrete backing.
And look closely at the planks themselves.
They had separated, leaving big gaps.
A bullet could easily pass through.
In this case, the baffle might well has not have been there and served no purpose at all.
And Buster was appalled by the bullet holes in the back of the building.
Several of these holes had been plugged.
That means to me as a safety person, as a range person, as a long-time shooter that they knew that bullets were getting out of that range.
And they accepted that fact and continued to shoot.
The laser analysis projected the bullet path to the middle of the outdoor range, well in front of the firing line.
How could this be?
It was due to a monumental blunder.
During the competition, shooters were required to fire from several distances-- first, from the firing line at 25 yards; then they moved forward to 20 yards; and finally, to 15 yards.
The laser study showed that the fatal bullet was fired from the 15-yard line.
The architectural model shows the problem clearly.
By firing from the 15-yard line, shooters had to move in front of the eyebrow and the first set of protected baffles.
And Irwin's computer also showed another frightening reality.
From the 15-yard line, you could see the back of the air gun building.
If you can see it, you can shoot it.
And any projectile that might leave the range in that area was going to hit that building.
The laser showed the bullet flew under the last baffle, over the berm, and into the building.
It involved a bizarre trajectory.
It meant that the shooter missed the target high and to the left by more than 5 feet-- a terrible miss.
How could a trained marksman miss a target by that much from only 15 yards away?
Part of that answer was found in the gun itself.
Close examination revealed it had been modified.
It's like taking a standard car, making it a hot rod.
Some competitive shooters filed down parts of the gun to make it easier to pull the trigger quickly.
They've, uh, got it set to where they go off so easily, where they fire two rounds instead of one.
It feeds so fast.
The result is called doubling, which sometimes occurs as the gun recoils.
A recoil is the backward force created by the explosion pushing the gun up in the air.
Each type of gun recoils differently.
A .45 creates a recoil up and to the left.
Kirk Parks had the task of producing the computerized proof, a fact-based animation of what happened.
His firm specializes in forensic animation.
Parks videotaped hundreds of .45 caliber pistol shots using the same type pistol and ammunition.
He used this footage to create an exact computerized reproduction of the recoil for the animation.
And we shot the video from the top of the weapon.
And we shot it from the side.
And we shot it from the front.
Next, Parks created wire-frame models of a competitive shooter in action, and then animated Irwin's laser studies of the firing range and the bullet path to complete the picture.
It produced the exact results necessary to generate the bullet path that was surveyed-- up and to the left.
I can't say for sure that the gun doubled.
But all of the evidence, uh, seems to indicate that it did.
And it fired during the uncontrollable recoil.
This forensic animation was able to show what happened to Trey Cooley on the morning of September 29, 1991.
But the animation showed that the bullet took a remarkable journey, one which almost defied belief.
When Trey Cooley entered the Dallas Pistol & Revolver Club on September 29, 1991, the range was a tragedy just waiting to strike.
Club on September 29, 1991, the range was a tragedy just waiting to strike.
Outside on the firing range behind the air gun building, Dan Smith, one of the last competitors of the day, steps up to the 15-yard line.
Dan Smith, one of the last competitors of the day, steps up to the 15-yard line.
This moves him in front of two sets of safety baffles.
Using a modified gun, Smith takes aim and squeezes the trigger.
In a fraction of a second, another shot is fired during the recoil phase of the original shot.
It happened so quickly, the shooter doesn't know it left the gun.
The bullet misses the target high and to the left.
Traveling upwards, it passes underneath the last set of protected baffles and just 3 inches over the berm.
It's speeding at 1,200 feet per second.
The bullet blasts through the aluminum siding, goes through a storage room, misses a broom and some pipes by less than an inch, and then breaks through a second wall, entering the air gun range.
Then the bullet does something unbelievable.
It strikes an ordinary ceiling tile.
And for some unknown reason, it doesn't blast straight through into the roof.
Instead, it skids along the tile for 7 inches before mysteriously changing direction, making a 10-degree turn and begins a downward path.
It slows to about 900 feet per second, penetrates a plaster wall, and enters Trey Cooley's head.
The Cooley family filed a negligence suit against the gun club and individuals involved with the competition.
The judge who presided over the civil case was impressed with the visual and computerized evidence.
I've been on the bench 6 and 1/2 years, and I would say that's in the top 2 or 3 or 4, in terms of just the-- the professionalism and the effectiveness of-- of the, uh demonstrative evidence brought into court.
The Cooley's attorney says the forensic animation and model explained this tragedy in a way nothing else could.
I could not have possibly gotten the result that I got on behalf of the Cooley family without them.
The animation also helped Butch Cooley understand what had happened to his son.
Butch Cooley understand what had happened to his son.
But there is still little peace for Trey's dad.
What's peace?
It is taking one day at a time.
Change just one thing and Trey Cooley might be alive today.
Cooley might be alive today.
The range.
It wouldn't have happened because I would not have allowed that competition to occur on that particular range.
They may not even be aware that it's double-firing or slam-firing on them.
They may think it's properly functioning.
The bullet.
If it had been a softer bullet, they may not have ricocheted as much, would not have had the velocity.
Or if the shooter had been standing at the proper firing line, the shot would have hit the baffle or flown over the building.
But why did this fatal bullet change direction as it hit the soft ceiling tile instead of blasting straight through as it did with the hard walls?
Bullets can do incredible things-- things they're not expected to do.
These thoughts haunt Butch Cooley.
No explanation can ease the pain felt by a father who woke his son early-- Want to go or not?
Want to go or not?
No, no, I want to go.
I should have let him sleep.
I'm going, OK.
I'm going.
Get out of my face!
On a hot summer evening in 1992, neighbors heard the familiar sound of an argument coming from the Campano the residence.
No way! I quit!
I promise, I quit!
According to Christopher Campano, his wife left the house shortly after their argument to calm down.
Quick, get out here!
Go! I quit!
Caren Campano was never seen again.
Caren Campano was just two weeks shy of her 43rd birthday when she disappeared.
She had just come back to Oklahoma City after visiting her three children who were living in New York.
Back to the home she shared with her third husband, Chris.
She had come back to New York and she went to talking about moving back because of her family.
And-- And she was upset.
Chris and Caren Campano were married in December of 1987.
Friends described them as an odd couple.
She was 15 years older than Chris and it was her third marriage, his first.
They were introduced to one another by Caren's best friend, who also happened to be Chris's mother.
Chris was a drifter, worked construction jobs, and spend some time in jail for petty theft.
Caren was the main wage earner working as a bill collector for this credit adjustment company in town.
On the evening of July 1, 1992, Chris and Caren had one of their frequent arguments, this time over his use of drugs.
And I was into drugs and she was, you know, nagging at me and trying to get me into drug programs, and you know, just trying to help.
It was loud enough for the neighbors to hear.
I could hear Caren screaming.
No, please, please.
And, don't do that.
Couldn't make out a lot of what's being said, just a lot of screaming.
According to Chris, after the argument Caren left the house for a walked, headed to the Buy For Less convenience store for some personal items, a few blocks away.
Chris left, too, driving to a local bar for a few drinks, staying until about midnight.
The next morning, Chris called Caren's office to see if she had reported to work.
Her supervisor said, she hadn't shown up, or even called in.
Chris then phoned the police to report her missing.
When the police arrived to take Chris' statement, they looked around briefly and reported seeing no evidence of foul play, or anything out of place or unusual.
If a person is going to run away or leave her husband, she's not just going to walk away and leave everything behind.
She's going to take the things that mean the most to her.
Especially when you're dealing with a woman, things of, you know, toiletries, makeup, and that kind of thing.
And of course, we found all those things intact in the bedroom, in the bathroom.
And it was if she just disappeared off the face of the earth without taking anything with her.
While the police were there, Chris mentioned that the house had been burglarized the night before while he was out drinking and that some items were missing.
Chris mentioned that the house had been burglarized the night before while he was out drinking and that some items were missing.
Police asked Chris to sign a waiver to allow a search of the house.
And he agreed to do so.
And thought that would be good.
And even commented that he hoped that we found something in the house that would help us with the investigation.
The first thing I recall seeing is, the bed was against the south wall.
And right next to the bed was a large white trash bag.
And underneath that trash bag I could see a very large brownish-colored stain.
Of course, the next thing we did was went and got some Hemosticks, which we carried in our vehicle.
A Hemostick is a chemical strip that can immediately tell whether or not blood is present.
You take the dry Hemostick, and with your finger, just lightly smear it on the suspect stain to where some of it is transferred on the Hemostick.
Take a drop of distilled water, put it on the Hemostick.
Flick off the excess water.
And you have a dark green, which is a positive presumptive test for the presence of blood.
The stain on the carpet was, indeed, blood.
But was it human?
And if so, whose was it?
The first day we were in the house, I put on a pair of gloves, and that spot on that carpet was still moist.
I put on a pair of gloves, and that spot on that carpet was still moist.
This piece of carpet and the padding was completely soaked with blood.
It was such a massive amount of blood, that there were still actual moisture involved, that it was not completely dry.
The carpet was removed and delivered to the Oklahoma City Police Departments Forensic Chemistry Lab.
City Police Departments Forensic Chemistry Lab.
I went on to do a Octalony test.
It's a species determination test to determine as to whether or not that blood came from a human or an animal source.
It was human blood.
That was enough to convince me that we weren't dealing with a routine missing persons case.
The police needed more you go on, and felt the answers lay inside the Campano's house.
When police discovered human blood inside the Campano's bedroom, they suspected the blood stain might belong to Caren Campano.
They also suspected that Chris knew more about her disappearance than he was admitting.
She left at 7:30.
And what did you do then? -I went to-- Under police questioning, Chris maintained that he knew nothing about his wife's whereabouts, but his alibi was weak.
Under police questioning, Chris maintained that he knew nothing about his wife's whereabouts, but his alibi was weak.
Chris maintained that he knew nothing about his wife's whereabouts, but his alibi was weak.
The bartender didn't recall seeing Chris Campano on the night of July 1.
Chris Campano on the night of July 1.
And police discovered that Chris had pawned some of Caren's jewelry the morning after her disappearance.
Without a body, the only thing left for the police to do was run more tests inside the house.
There weren't any visible signs of violence, besides the bloodstained they found in the bedroom.
We saw a typical little frame house for central Oklahoma City, that, as you went inside, looked quite clean, quite neat.
Things had been cleaned out of it.
The walls looked clean, ceiling looked clean, the floor looked clean.
So there wasn't much to see at all.
So they decided to look for blood which may have been cleaned up, or wasn't visible to the naked eye.
To do so, investigators used a special chemical solution called luminol, an extremely sensitive test which can detect blood which has been removed by water, or even detergents and bleach.
Luminol is a fluorescence-type chemical.
Spray it on a substance that may contain blood, it reacts with the heme group in the blood itself.
The iron portions will luminous of fluoresce.
To do the luminol test, investigators needed complete darkness, so they waited until nightfall.
They began their chemical dragnet in the bedroom, where they discovered the stain on the carpet a few days earlier.
First, they took photographs of the room the way it looked to the naked eye.
Then they sprayed the luminol.
The results were astonishing.
There were some instances in that house where it glowed so brightly that you could actually see the person standing next to, there was so much blood in there.
The luminol told a horrific tale.
Blood had been everywhere-- on the walls, the ceiling, on the doors.
It looked like a bloodbath had occurred there, something from a horror movie.
Even more telling was the blood spatter, which is the placement of the stains.
Where they were located, the size of the drops, and the trails of blood all told a story.
Someone had been beaten in the bedroom with a blunt object.
They we're in two trails, what we refer to as castoff trails.
So if you had an object, for example, in your hand and that object was blood covered, and if you were swinging that object overhead, the centripetal force of pulling the blood down to the end of the object will pass the blood in the direction that the object is being swung.
And in this case, it's going to the ceiling.
There are two distinct trails.
And you can tell that there's at least two swings with the blood covered object.
Luminol was then applied to the rest of the house.
And even to the outside steps and walkways.
At one point, there's a swipe of blood that was on the kitchen door leading into the utility room that would have been about head level if you were carrying a body, had to turn the body sideways to get through a normal door.
And then, at that point, it appeared the body was laid down on the ground, and then drug from the utility room down the back steps.
And you could see pooled luminescence on each step.
And then drag marks that were luminescent and all the way down the walkway until you get to the point that you were at the driveway.
And at that point, they disappeared.
Very, very dramatic presentation.
The house was telling it's story.
One of an apparently gruesome attack.
But there was still unanswered questions.
Where was the body?
And the weapon?
And was the blood Caren Campano's?
Police still couldn't prove a murder had been committed.
Although the police knew someone was violently attacked inside to Campano residence, they couldn't be sure a homicide had been committed.
Was there enough blood in the Campano house to prove that someone was dead?
And was that someone Caren Campano?
The investigators, at a later time, decided that we would go back and try to do a measurement test to see how much blood had to have been bled out on that carpet to make that size of a stain.
Police made sure their test was as accurate as possible.
They used a piece of the original carpet, as well as a weight to simulate a human head.
Next, they poured human blood around the weight until they created a stain measuring 887 square inches, the same size stain they originality discovered.
Statistically, one could say that between 1,300 and 1,400 cc's of blood would create that-- would create that stain.
That's more than 40% of the blood volume of a woman Caren Campano's size.
No one could survive with that amount of blood loss.
So at that point, it became pretty apparent to me that, if this lady was missing, and if this lady was dead, that this lady probably was killed right there.
The authorities now knew a homicide had been committed in the house, and that someone had died in the bedroom in a pool of blood.
But was the victim Caren Campano?
Police didn't have a sample of Caren Campano's blood to compare to the blood stain.
If Caren's mother and father were still living, it would've been a simple matter to examine their DNA, since Caren would have received half of her DNA from her mother, and half from her father.
But Caren's father was deceased.
The Oklahoma City Police Department asked the FBI to get involved, to see if there was any way they could figure out whether the blood found in the house belonged to Caren Campano.
The police obtained blood samples from Caren's mother, her two sisters, her three children, and one of her ex-husbands.
And so in this particular case, the object of the examination was to see if this DNA from the blood stain of unknown origin was matching-- at least half of the DNA was matching-- to the relatives from Caren Campano.
Hal Deadman of the FBI's DNA Analysis Unit conducted what is called RFLP analysis, analyzing pieces of DNA from four different chromosomes.
This is the DNA profile of Caren Campano's mother.
And next to it, on either side, are two of her daughters, Caren Campano's sisters.
Both daughters share half of their DNA with their mother.
This lane shows a DNA sample from one of Caren Campano's ex-husband's.
The next lane shows a sample from his son, whose mother was Caren Campano.
The father and son both share the upper band.
The son would have received the lower band from his mother, which matches the band from his grandmother, Caren's mother.
The next autorad compares the family members' DNA to the unknown blood stain found in the Campano home.
The top marker matches the genetic profile from the first of Caren Campano's children.
And the markers from the blood stain also matched the bands from Caren Campano's two other children from another marriage.
The results were more fairly straightforward.
They were totally consistent with the blood coming from Caren Campano.
Eight months after the disappearance of Caren Campano, police concluded that Christopher Campano murdered his wife, and was arrested.
All of the evidence pointed towards Chris Campano-- the forensic evidence, the argument neighbors heard on the night of Caren's disappearance, Chris' lack of an alibi for the entire evening, and the fact that he pawned some of her things.
Chris' lack of an alibi for the entire evening, and the fact that he pawned some of her things.
The prosecution believed that Caren Campano never left her house for a walk, as her husband had suggested.
Neighbors heard Caren and Chris arguing that night.
And the forensic evidence suggests that the argument moved to their bedroom, where it escalated to and turned violent.
As Chris stood near the window, he struck Caren in the head with a blunt object at least three times, possibly more, producing the castoff blood trails on the ceiling and walls.
Caren fell to the floor, her head striking the bedpost, where her blood was also found.
As Caren lay bleeding from her massive head injuries, Chris left and went to a local bar.
Chris left and went to a local bar.
He needed to wait until the neighbors were asleep before removing Caren's body.
When he returned home, he wrapped Caren's body in a sheet with a telephone wire and carried her through the house.
Luminol tests showed that Caren's head brushed against the door leaving a blood smear, later cleaned with detergent.
Chris then dropped the body onto the floor and dragged it through the side door and out towards the car.
He probably disposed of her body late that night in a deserted location.
After returning home, Chris removed all visible traces of blood, both inside and out.
The DNA analysis showed the blood found on the carpet belonged to Caren Campano.
And the medical examiner would testify that Caren Campano suffered horrendous head injuries during the attack, which no one could survive.
Prosecutors were confident of a conviction, even though they didn't have a body, or a murder weapon.
I thought it was very likely we might never find the body victim.
But just preliminary hearing was set to get under way, everything changed.
The police found Caren Campano.
This part right here wasn't quite so grown up with all this ivy, and she was laying right down there by that large cottonwood tree, north to south.
And there were some blankets around her.
There was no greenery at that time.
If there had been greenery at that time, you would never know she was there.
The body lay in a remote area off a major interstate highway, until some youngsters on dirt bikes stumbled across it.
All we knew was that we had a female's body out there.
We had no idea who it was.
Of course we were hoping it was Caren, but we didn't know.
There was another important find.
Police discovered a piece of the check underneath the body.
Although they couldn't determine to whom the check was issued, it was from the Shell Oil Company, and mailed to someone in New York.
The check was for $83.34.
Caren Campano was from New York.
And her family had a part interest in a gas station This was the first definitive piece that we had, that we knew, at that point, there was a great possibility that it was Caren.
This was the first definitive piece that we had, that we knew, at that point, there was a great possibility that it was Caren.
And of course, we wouldn't know for sure until they made identification through dental records and DNA.
Dr. Tom Glass heads the Forensic Odontology Department at the University of Oklahoma.
Department at the University of Oklahoma.
With the help of Caren Campano's dental records, and an almost complete set of teeth found in this skull of the body, Dr.
Glass' task was fairly easy.
What I do, in making the comparison, then, is simply go frame by frame by frame of the patient's antimordem dental x-rays, the x-rays made by the dentist, with the frames of the same areas made from the skeletonized remains.
She had a very thorough dentist, who documented what he had done.
And that documentation allowed to the identification, in Caren Campano's case, to be very profound.
And the DNA analysis of the bone marrow confirmed it.
The last doubts had been removed.
Personally, I'm glad she was eventually found, because of the family back in New York.
I talked to them at length over the phone.
Later on, during the investigation, I met them.
They're really great people.
And I really had strong feelings for them, hoping one day she would be found so they could put their own fears to rest, and give her a decent burial.
And Christopher Campano confessed.
The remarkable thing about, the autopsy confirmed the prosecution's theory of how Caren died.
And that theory, remember, was based only on the luminol, the blood spatter analysis, and the blood volume tests.
The maxilla were fractured. The mandibles were fractured.
The nose was fractured.
The sinuses were fractured.
The skull was extensively fractured.
And yet, the cervical spine was intact, and there are only three fractures in the ribs.
So this is not the hallmark of somebody that's been run over by a car, or somebody who has had a train wreck, or something like that.
This is the hallmark of someone who has sustained a severe beating about the head and face.
So it was obvious that this was an assault.
Police and forensic science had solved a difficult puzzle.
It all told a story.
If it was just more the pieces of the puzzle coming together, even all the way to the end, when the body was actually It's like, you know, we've got most of the puzzle there.
It's like, you know, we've got most of the puzzle there.
You know what it is.
Even with some missing pieces, you know what it is.
But then, with that body found, it was like that was the very last piece that just fit in there.
In January of 1994, a year and a half after Caren was killed, Christopher Campano went on trial for his life.
His defense attorney couldn't refute the forensic findings.
They were just too strong.
Once I had decided to make that leap and embrace the evidence, then my task became easier.
It was a matter, then of looking at the psychological aspects of the case, rather than the hard forensics of the case.
I suggested to the judge and jury, if it was going to be deliberately planned out and methodical, that kind of blood wouldn't be there.
There would have been none in the house, probably.
The homicide would have occurred elsewhere if it had been a coldblooded killing.
The jury bought at least part of the argument.
It found Campano guilty of manslaughter, not the first-degree murder charge the State was seeking.
I feel sorry for her.
I feel sorry for what I did to her.
I can't bring her back, you know?
I just to pay for what I've done.
Christopher Campano was sentenced to 1,000 years in prison.
Early one morning in a deserted area outside of Phoenix, a motorcyclist discovered the body of a young woman.
She had been beaten, bound, strangled, and possibly raped.
The surrounding plants would tell more about her killer than any other single piece of the evidence.
When investigators from the Sheriff's department arrived at the crime scene, they gathered every possible piece of evidence.
The victim was nude, except for a pulled up tank top and a t-shirt wrapped around her neck, which was probably used to strangle her.
Her wrists and ankles were loosely bound with shoelaces and what looked like picture hanging wire.
Nearby, investigators found a syringe, some articles of clothing, then they heard some evidence.
It was a pager, found deep in the grass a few feet from the body.
The discovery of the pager triggered a larger search, and a photographer took some aerial photographs.
There appeared to be a circular area of matted grass where an altercation possibly took place.
Police took the victim's remains to the medical examiner for identification and autopsy.
A fingerprint search identified the victim as 30-year-old Denise Johnson, a single mother of two young children.
She was born and raised in an area of Phoenix known as the projects.
She wasn't a bad girl.
She-- some of her friends, I think she got with the wrong friends.
I ain't gonna say they made her do these things, now.
She hung around with people that liked to party, drink, and-- I don't really know what they were doing, but she-- you know, she was out there in the world with people that did drugs, I'm sure, and sometimes, I think, she trusted too much.
Denise made her living on the streets of Phoenix.
She had a history of short changing truck drivers in various drug deals at local truck stops, which earned her the nickname Twist Mama.
Her friends cautioned her that her lifestyle was probably going to find her in a lot of trouble someday, and eventually it did.
But who ended Denise Johnson's life?
The investigation began with the pager found lying near the body.
It belong to this man, a local trucker named Mark Bogan He said that on his way home from work the night before, he stopped to make a phone call.
That's when he met Denise Johnson for the first time.
Hi, how you doing? -Hello there.
Bogan said she asked for a ride to the interstate.
Why not? -Thanks.
Once inside the truck, she made some sexual advances.
They pulled off the road and had consensual sex in the cab of his truck.
Afterwards, as he was dropping her off, he said she attempted to steal some of his things off the dashboard.
Well I had a really good time.
So did I, baby. -Did you?
Oh, always when I'm in the company of a lovely lady.
I would really love to have my wallet back.
After a brief scuffle, he retrieved his wallet.
She got out and left on foot.
Bogan said that was the last he saw of her.
The next morning, he noticed his pager was missing, assumed he lost it, and called the pager company to report it missing.
During the interrogation of Mark Bogan, investigators noticed scratch marks on the side of his face.
If there were scratches on the suspect's face, then you would expect that if those were, in fact, inflicted by fingers or fingernails of the victim, there should be some residue of either the skin cells and or maybe even blood under the fingernails.
The autopsy of Denise Johnson revealed no skin or blood under any of her fingernails.
The medical examiner found that Denise Johnson's death was caused by asphyxiation due to strangulation.
Blood tests showed cocaine in her system.
However, there were no signs of any type of sexual activity.
There was no semen found, no foreign hair, clothing fibers, or saliva found anywhere on her body.
The autopsy told investigators how Denise Johnson died, but provided no clues about her killer.
Their one suspect, Mark Bogan, was apparently a dead end.
The Sheriff's office had not only a murder, but a mystery.
On the day after police discovered Denise Johnson's body, homicide detective Charlie Norton was assigned to the case.
I decided that it would help me as the investigator to go out and familiarize myself with the scene where the body was found.
Denise Johnson's body was discovered in a remote part of Maricopa County, about a half an hour away from downtown Phoenix.
Charlie Norton was looking for anything out of place or unusual, anything that might have been overlooked the day before.
Then he saw it-- something peculiar on a palo verde tree just a few feet from where the body was found.
I had parked my car on the pavement.
I noticed that there was a-- a branch that was hanging over, and when I looked at that branch, I noticed that there was a fresh abrasion, and I had no idea what it might mean, but I took a picture of it, then I took some beans off of that particular tree.
I noticed that there was a fresh abrasion, and I had no idea what it might mean, but I took a picture of it, then I took some beans off of that particular tree.
Meanwhile, investigators confiscated Mark Bogan's truck to look for possible evidence linking him or his truck to the crime scene.
It was completely clean-- no fingerprints, semen, blood, saliva, hair, or clothing fibers-- no evidence at all that Denise Johnson was even in the truck.
But when investigators and police photographers looked in the back of the truck, they made an interesting discovery-- they found two bean pods from a palo verde tree.
Was it possible that Bogan's truck brushed against the palo verde tree at the crime scene, causing two bean pods to drop into the back of the truck?
The problem was, palo verde trees are very common in Arizona-- there are tens of thousands of them in the Phoenix area alone.
But Charlie Norton's boss had an idea-- to see if DNA testing could match the bean pods from Bogan's truck to the tree with the abrasion at the crime scene.
I suggested to charlie at the time, I said you know, I said it would be a real good idea if we could find someone somewheres in the United States that is involved in DNA testing of plant life.
I said it would be a real good idea if we could find someone somewheres in the United States that is involved in DNA testing of plant life.
And I said what the hell have we got to lose?
You know, where are we gonna go from here?
What's the number for ID?
Norton started working the phones, calling scientists all over the United States.
I got answers like it couldn't be done to maybe it could be done, and that if it could be done that the cost would be prohibitive.
Fifteen telephone calls later, he found someone who offered some hope-- ironically, just 100 miles away, at the University of Arizona in Tucson.
100 miles away, at the University of Arizona in Tucson.
I saw that as sort of a public service thing that we could do that would show some of this science is relevant to people in maybe such a way that's not quite as obvious sometimes through agriculture.
Could DNA really show that one plant or tree was different from another, even though they were the same species?
DNA is present in all cells of all living things.
It's a little like a computer program containing all of the information necessary to create a living thing.
All humans have different DNA profiles, except for identical twins.
In the early 1980s, doctor Alec Jeffreys, a British scientist, discovered a test that made it possible to identify an individual's DNA profile.
Jeffreys' breakthrough technique was first used in a criminal case in 1986.
But plant DNA had never been used in a criminal case, and scientists weren't even sure they could figure out a way to extract DNA from the palo verde seed pods.
Well, we certainly use fingerprinting a lot in agriculture, but we've never looked at this particular species of this tree.
Nobody has probably ever done much biology on it at all.
Prosecutors had circumstantial evidence linking Mark Bogan to the Denise Johnson's murder, but they needed something more definitive.
Mark Bogan to the Denise Johnson's murder, but they needed something more definitive.
They knew they would have to prove that Bogan was at the crime scene, and the palo verde pods were their best chance.
The scientists had no idea that their research would be the cornerstone of a murder case.
The Arizona Sheriff's department wanted to know if there was any way scientists could match the two seed pods found in the back of Mark Bogan's truck to the palo verde tree next to where they discovered Denise Johnson's body.
Denise Johnson's body.
But there were thousands of palo verde trees in the Phoenix area alone, and there had never been a DNA test on this type of tree.
We had to learn how to do the analysis so that we could say do trees look different from each other in this species?
Because what we wanted to know was not was this a palo verde tree, but could I match it to that specific tree.
Dr. Helentjaris used what is known as a randomly amplified polymorphic DNA technique, or RAPID.
This is a less common test than RFLP, the one used in searches for human DNA.
One of the great things about RAPIDs is that you're able to know nothing about an individual species or type of organism.
You don't have to have any prior knowledge about it-- all you have to do is get DNA and the method works.
The test begins by removing the beans from their hard outer shell or pod.
Seeds have DNA both from the mother tree and other trees that would have pollinated it, so we need to get rid of those and just use the pod material, which will only have DNA from the mother tree.
The shells are put into liquid nitrogen, making them brittle and easier to grind into a fine powder.
A chemical solution is added, and the DNA floats free, a sticky bundle of complex molecules.
The sample amount of DNA from a seed pod is too small for analysis, so scientists increase the sample size by copying the DNA strand.
They use a technique called polymerase chain reaction, or PCR.
The copying process takes place in a DNA thermal cycler.
Within a few hours, this technique multiplies the DNA millions of times.
The DNA is then placed into various lanes of a gel with a dye added, and then subjected to an electrical field.
Under ultraviolet light, it's possible to see how the electrical current draws the negatively charged fragments through the gel to the positive end at the top.
The results resemble a bar code, the genetic fingerprint of a palo verde tree.
These fingerprints enabled Helentjaris to make an important discovery-- the two pods found in Mark Bogan's truck matched each other, and they also matched the pods taken from the tree at the crime scene-- the tree next to where Denise Johnson's body was discovered.
Every other palo verdes tree tested had a completely different DNA profile.
It was the result that investigators and the district attorney had hoped for.
It wasn't the criminal itself, but it was a particular tree that we had to identify.
And, in fact, they had to match-- we had to match that up.
He was able to take the original samples, take a part of the samples from the pickup truck, determine that those two pods came from the very same tree.
Then he compared those with samples from all 12 trees and matched it to a tree there at the crime scene, not knowing that the tree had the scrape on it, to which he matched it.
But there were only 12 trees in the initial test, and then the prosecution felt that wasn't a large enough sample.
They needed to show a potential judge and jury that all of the palo verde trees in Arizona had a different DNA profile.
So the district attorney sent Dr. Helentjaris pods from 100 different trees, asking her to prove that each had a separate and distinct DNA profile.
And he tried to trick Helentjaris.
I did not tell Dr. Helentjaris that I had gone back out to the scene and had a deputy take a sample from the same tree which had the scrape on it.
Doctor Helentjaris proved that each of the pods had a different DNA profile, and he also discovered the prosecution's trick.
I called him and I was a little concerned because, uh, you know, well we could tell all these trees apart and so forth, but we put the sample back in and it looked like it matched one of these supposedly random trees that they'd gone out and done.
So it's like a touchdown in the end zone.
I knew it.
I knew he had hit on it.
Out of 20 other samples that he had tested on one gel, he hit and matched perfectly.
Police arrested Mark Bogan and charged him for the murder of Denise Johnson.
He entered a plea of not guilty, but the question remained-- would this new DNA evidence be admissible in court?
No one had ever introduced plant DNA as evidence in a criminal trial anywhere.
We held a preliminary hearing before the judge only, to review the scientific evidence to see whether or not it was evidence that was generally accepted in the scientific community as both valid and reliable.
For three days, without a jury on hand, lawyers and scientists argued whether plant DNA should be admitted into a criminal trial for the first time ever.
What all of the scientists agreed about was that plant DNA, like human DNA, was unique to each plant, and if properly tested, could distinguish one palo verde tree from another palo verde tree.
And there seemed to be no dispute about that.
Judge Bolton denied the defense motion to prohibit Dr. Helentjaris' testimony, thereby allowing the DNA evidence to be admitted at the trial.
In setting a precedent, Judge Bolton had made DNA history.
We were the first criminal case in the country that used a DNA comparison of plant material to-- as a piece of evidence.
Now, armed with the potent weapon of the DNA fingerprint, the prosecution went to trial, attempting to prove to a jury that Mark Bogan murdered Denise Johnson.
Bogan murdered Denise Johnson.
What happened to Denise Johnson on the night of May 2, 1992?
The prosecution believed that mark Bogan met Denise Johnson at a phone booth.
Hi, how you doing?
They spoke briefly and Denise asked for a ride.
Sure, why not? -Thanks.
They drove to a deserted location for what was going to be a consensual sexual encounter.
How would you like to have some real fun?
Bogan asked Denise if she would agree to some light bondage and tied her wrists and ankles with some picture frame wire and shoelaces.
Some of Bogan's ex-girlfriends would testify that he enjoyed bondage, and another witness told investigators that she saw the same type of wire in the cab of his truck just a few days earlier.
No, stop it now.
At some point, Denise Johnson objected to what was happening and asked Bogan to stop.
Johnson got out of the truck and tried to run, with Bogan fast behind.
Quickly, the situation turned violent.
The two struggled in the open field.
Bogan lost the pager he carried on his waist, which fell into the high grass.
Bogan strangled Johnson with her own T-shirt, then he dragged her body under some nearby bushes and left.
As Bogan drove away, his truck brushed against the palo verde tree, leaving the abrasion.
Two seed pods dropped into the back of his truck.
An eyewitness saw a white truck similar to the one Bogan owned coming out of the road leading from the crime scene, going through a stop sign, and speeding off in the direction of Phoenix.
The witness said it was about 1:30 in the morning.
Bpgam lived 18 minutes from the area, and his wife told police she awoke as Mark returned home, just after 2:00 in the morning.
Most of the evidence against Mark Bogan was circumstantial-- the lost beeper, the picture frame wire, his interest in bondage, and the witness who saw a white truck in the vicinity of the crime scene the night of the murder.
But the most critical evidence in the case was the plant DNA.
There wasn't a fingerprint, there wasn't a drop of blood, there wasn't a hair, there were none of those things that anybody could say were part of the victim's body found-- must've been left by the victim on the defendant or on the defendant's property, or vice versa.
He had, uh, admitted to the detectives that he'd washed his truck the next morning.
He got rid of all of the evidence in the truck, except for two polo verde pods.
They needed evidence that placed Mark at the scene, because he did have a credible story.
As a prosecutor, I had a mantle of evidence that I wanted to place upon the shoulders of the defendant.
The palo verde pods took the mantle by the drawstring and wrapped it around his neck.
Unable to challenge Dr. Helentjaris' findings themselves, the defense challenged the evidence, implying the pods were planted in the back of Mark's truck.
But investigators said the seed pods were found in Bogan's truck before samples were taken from the crime scene.
If I was going to plant evidence, I would plant something that-- that I know that I could match later on and--and probably be a little bit more assured of a conviction.
I would plant something that-- that I know that I could match later on and--and probably be a little bit more assured of a conviction.
The jury found Mark Bogan guilty of murder in the first degree.
He was sentenced to life in prison without parole for at least 25 years.
The appellate court upheld the verdict.
Mark Bogan continues to maintain his innocence, and the appeal process is continuing.
I'm trying to forget this case, because I'm the only person on the planet that lost to a plant.
It was something that hadn't been done before, something that was certainly very different from the routine things that we do every day as judges.
But I love my daughter very much.
I love all my children.
But it's something we just have to go through.
It's done.
I don't know what in the world could have tripped him off to hurt her like that.
I don't know.
But I hope one day we'll find out.
On the night of May 22, 1992, Betty Wilson returned home immediately after her Alcoholics Anonymous meeting.
Betty Wilson returned home immediately after her Alcoholics Anonymous meeting.
She had some last minute packing to do for a vacation she was taking the next day with her husband.
As she walked up the stairs, headed for her bedroom, she found her husband lying in a pool of blood.
Clearly Jack Wilson had been murdered.
Experts couldn't agree.
I went up the steps, and as I rounded the top of the stairs, with my head down and looking up to turn on the light, I saw Jack lying in the floor. [screams] Betty Wilson immediately ran to a neighbor's house and called 911.
I saw Jack lying in the floor. [screams] Betty Wilson immediately ran to a neighbor's house and called 911.
Betty Wilson immediately ran to a neighbor's house and called 911.
The Huntsville, Alabama police arrived at the murder scene within minutes of the call.
Lying in the hallway was a white male who appeared to have been beaten, and also stabbed.
He was laying in a puddle of blood there, in the hallway.
Lying next to the body, the apparent murder weapon, a 34 inch long metal baseball bat covered with blood.
But police couldn't locate the weapon used to stab him.
In Jack Wilson's bedroom, the telephone line had been cut, and a green ski mask was found on top of the bed.
They also found and open pistol box with ammunition, but no sign of the gun.
There were no indications the Wilson home had been explored for valuables.
No drawers had been emptied, no closets searchead.
Jack Wilson's wallet was on the floor near his shoes.
There was no cash inside, but his credit cards were.
If the motive wasn't burglary, why was Jack Wilson murdered?
Wilson was a 55-year-old eye doctor.
Very successful, well-known, and well-loved in the community.
I would even hate to estimate how many people that Jack treated absolutely free, because they needed medical help and they afford to pay.
Jack and Betty Wilson had been married for about 14 years.
Each had three children from previous marriages.
We were happy and satisfied with each other.
He met every need that I or my children, and my grandchildren He was a wonderful person.
He was a wonderful person.
He was sincere.
He was honest, straightforward.
He was fun to be with.
As police began searching for clues, homicide detectives learned a shocking piece of information.
The County Sheriff's Office had received a tip just the day before.
An informant in the small town the Vincent, Alabama said she overheard a conversation that a man from Vincent had been hired to kill a doctor.
That information led police on a long, convoluted journey, from the backwoods of Alabama, to one of its finest neighborhoods.
It ended in a bitter courtroom dispute, because of the two conflicting interpretations of what happened during Jack Wilson's last moments alive.
The body of Jack Wilson was transported to the state medical examiner in Birmingham for a routine autopsy.
Dr. Joseph Embry noticed a series of lacerations on Wilson's head and a fractured skull.
Wilson had also suffered a fractured hyoid bone in his neck, and a fractured right shoulder with a puncture wound clearly visible.
Both arms were fractured.
These were defensive-type wounds, indicating Wilson tried to fend off his attacker.
And there were two stab wounds in his abdomen.
Officially the cause of death was listed as blunt force trauma to the head.
The Huntsville Police Serology Lab identified the blood found on the bat to be the same blood type as Jack Wilson.
But they didn't find any fingerprints.
Next, police turned to the information they received before the murder.
We had a concerned citizen in the county that overheard a conversation that Mr. White had stated that he was going to Huntsville the weekend to kill someone.
Huntsville police drove to Vincent, Alabama, about 100 miles away, to interview James White.
He lived in a trailer on the outskirts of town.
James White was a handyman at the Vincent Elementary School where his children attended classes.
Betty Wilson's twin sister, Peggy Lowe, taught first grade at the same school.
White had a past criminal record, a history of drug and alcohol abuse, and a dishonorable discharge from the military.
Police interrogated White for 10 hours.
And he admitted being inside the Wilson home the night of the murder.
I'd been drinking for last three or four days, popping pills, drinking, smoking dope.
And all I knew was I wanted to get away.
And they said the man got beat with a baseball bat.
But I don't remember a baseball bat being around nowhere.
But I do remember that I hit the man.
He turned me loose.
Before police returned to Huntsville, they searched White's trailer.
They found a pair of shoes with a blood stain, which later matched Jack Wilson's blood type.
In the abandoned house next door, police discovered a revolver which was registered to Betty Wilson.
And in James White's truck, a book of poetry from the Huntsville Public Library, which had been signed out by Betty Wilson.
Police arrested James White and charged him in the murder of Jack Wilson.
Then, a shocking disclosure.
James White told police that Betty Wilson and her twin sister Peggy Lowe had hired him to kill Jack Wilson for $5,000.
Betty Wilson and Peggy Lowe were immediately picked up for questioning.
The police came.
They jerked me around.
They jerked my watch off of my arm and threw it across the room saying, you won't need this where you're going.
As police looked for a motive, rumors surfaced about the unconventional relationship between Jack and Betty Wilson.
They lived separate lives with separate bedrooms, and not much of a sexual relationship.
Betty admitted to police, she had a number of affairs while married to Jack.
Jack Wilson suffered from Crohn's Disease, and wore an ostomy bag, which Betty admitted to friends she found repulsive.
And in the mind of police, perhaps the strongest motive of all, Betsy Wilson would receive the bulk of her husband's $6 million estate.
The star witness, James White, without whom there was no case against the sisters, cut a deal with the prosecution.
And he even had it in writing.
He would implicate Betty Wilson and Peggy Lowe in return for a reduced sentence.
The sisters were tried separately.
Betty Wilson went on trial first.
According to James White's testimony and the prosecutions interpretation of the autopsy findings, James White entered the Wilson's home and waited in one of the upstairs bedrooms.
James White entered the Wilson's home and waited in one of the upstairs bedrooms.
Jack Wilson arrived ride home around 5:00 PM.
And neighbors saw him step out to the front yard to hammer a campaign poster into the lawn with a baseball bat.
He then walked back inside the house and headed upstairs to his bedroom.
White says, he changed his mind, and decided not to murder Wilson.
But as he was leaving, encountered him in the hallway.
The two struggled.
White grabbed the baseball bat and struck Wilson in the head.
He was then stabbed twice in the abdomen.
White said Betty Wilson met him outside and drove him to his truck.
However, police forensic experts found no evidence of White's hair, clothing fibers, or even a fingerprint inside Betty Wilson's car.
Lacking any strong physical evidence, the prosecution attacked Betty Wilson's character.
And they subpoenaed one of her ex-lovers to testify about their adulterous relationship.
The jury found Betty Wilson guilty of capital murder, and she was sentenced to life in prison with no chance parole.
I think Miss Wilson was convicted on her personal conduct.
She couldn't have been convicted on the evidence.
I mean, the physical evidence was not there to support it.
The prosecutions next task, to try Betty's twin sister, Peggy low for the same crime.
All of the witnesses and evidence against her would be similar.
But what they hadn't bargained for was the testimony of a defense expert who would drop a forensic bombshell-- that Jack Wilson was not murdered in the way the prosecution said.
Eight months after Betty Wilson was convicted of murder for hire, her twin sister, Peggy Lowe, went on trial for the same crime.
This time, the prosecution couldn't attacked the defendant's lifestyle.
Peggy Lowe was a first grade school teacher.
She and her husband were active in local church.
And she was even the lead singer with the church choir.
She had a long history of helping those in need.
My friends did for me what I couldn't do for myself.
When I could no longer cry, they cried for me.
When I couldn't pray, they prayed for me.
Peggy Lowe's attorneys had time to look for new evidence, and to go over the testimony from her sister's trial.
One of the things they noticed was that James White never admitted killing Jack Wilson.
The detectives told me that I hit him with a baseball bat, or I had to hit him with something rather heavy.
Uh-- and I think I told them that I kept reaching until I got something or other, and I hit the man.
And he turned me loose and I left.
That was just one other things that bothered Peggy Lowe's defense team.
The other was the crime scene.
How could this man beat this man so badly with a baseball bat that he broke his arms, and stabbed him, and beat his head terribly, and they're not be any blood splatter patterns?
The defense took the autopsy report and crime scene photos to Georgia, and showed them to Atlanta's Deputy Medical Examiner.
And if someone is being struck with a blunt instrument to cause lacerations like this, there's going to be a spray of blood that, it's not only sprayed when the instrument strikes the head, or strikes the arm, but also as the instrument is raised back, there's going to be a sprayed pattern that would go upwards onto the wall or onto the ceiling.
And I was really struck by the fact that, I could not really ascertain any significant spray pattern at all.
Dr. Sperry agreed to testify at Peggy Lowe's trial.
James White, once again, told his story.
But this time, he was severely challenged by the defense.
The whole case rested on a man's testimony.
The man is a liar, a child molester, shot his own men in Vietnam, he's been on psychedelic drugs.
He's a drunk.
He's a dope addict.
He's a cocaine user.
The other strong defense challenge came against the state medical examiner who did the autopsy.
The story that the murderer told didn't make sense.
Not only did they not make practical sense, they didn't make scientific sense.
And I believe that juries like scientific evidence.
But the most startling testimony was that of Dr. Kris Sperry.
When a blunt instrument of any sort is used to strike the head repeatedly, it is very, very common-- in fact, with repeated blows, almost always you will have, not only transfer of blood from the lacerations onto the instrument, but hair, as well.
And finding hair embedded in blood that's on the surface of the blunt instrument such as the bat would be very, very significant.
There was no hair that I know of that found on the bat.
As far as the skull, I don't know of any.
But all they did was the blood typing on the bat.
But Dr. Sperry went even further saying, he doubted that the bat was the murder weapon at all.
And James White never admitted using the bat.
Looking at the injuries that Dr. Wilson had, I felt that the injury pattern, that is, the lacerations and the fractures beneath these lacerations, were not of the type that would typically be caused by a baseball bat.
I felt that the injury pattern, that is, the lacerations and the fractures beneath these lacerations, were not of the type that would typically be caused by a baseball bat.
Baseball bats cause crushing injuries of the head, and will actually crush in the bones of the skull, just like an egg was being crushed.
The linear patterns of the wounds to Dr. Wilson's scalp led Dr. Sperry to conclude that it was more likely a fireplace poker that was used on Jack Wilson.
This was also explain the puncture wound found on Dr. Wilson's shoulder.
This was rather unusual, in and of itself.
And no one really had an explanation for that particular injury.
But when you think about a fireplace poker, that many of them are designed with a sort of a hook or a point that sticks out at a 90 degree angle, suddenly, that also made sense.
And it fit together with the whole pattern.
The autopsy report indicated that Dr. Wilson's hyoid bone had been fractured.
Sperry believed Wilson had also been strangled.
It didn't make a damn how Dr. Wilson got killed.
The question was, who did it?
And James White admitted to doing it, whether he stomped him, beat him with a bat, beat him with a stick.
But that's the type of bull that experts try and sell to juries.
And he had a theory that there was three people-- two to three people, that brought the body back to the scene and dumped there on the scene, which was utterly, to me, ridiculous.
What killed Dr. Wilson was not the issue.
The issue was, did Betty Wilson and Peggy low conspire with James White to kill Jack Wilson?
And Sperry brings in this photograph of something that happened in a book and shows the jury and says, oh, it couldn't have been a bat.
What difference does it make?
Dr. Wilson was beaten to death.
But to convict Peggy Lowe, the jury would have to believe James White.
And if Dr. Sperry was correct, the murder didn't happen that way James White said.
There were now two scenarios as to how Jack Wilson was murdered.
Jack Wilson was murdered.
Neighbors saw him on the front lawn around 5:00 PM, hammering the political poster into the ground with a baseball bat.
Using Dr. Sperry's interpretation, he was then attacked by at least two individuals.
During the struggle, Wilson's hyoid bone was fractured.
He was struck at least nine times in the head, and at least once in the shoulder, creating the puncture wound in the back of his neck, then stabbed twice in the abdomen.
The body was then placed in a tarp and carried into the house, dropped onto the wooden floor, and then turned 180 degrees.
His head brushed against the doorway molding, leaving a blood stain, and the swirling blood pattern on the floor.
They smeared blood onto the bat, so it would look like the murder weapon, took the fireplace poker and knife and fled.
The jury deliberated less than two hours.
Ladies and gentlemen, have you arrived at a verdict.
Yes, we have.
Would you read the verdict for me, please?
We, the jury, find the defendant not guilty.
It was such a relief.
I cried so hard people thought that she got the guilty verdict.
But they were tears of joy and relief.
But how could Doctors Sperry and Embry come to such different conclusions?
We asked two board certified forensic pathologists to review the autopsy report, as well as the crime scene photographs.
They both agreed the autopsy Dr. Embry performed was flawless.
It just wasn't enough.
Forensic science begins at the crime scene.
And the fact that police and the prosecution never showed Dr. Embry the bat or the crime scene photographs until just a few days before the first trial was a serious mistake.
Both experts suggested that a thorough forensic examination of the crime scene might have revealed the cause of the puncture wound on Wilson's shoulder.
But the two experts disagreed about the bat.
One was bothered by the length of Jack Wilson's hair on it.
The other wasn't.
Dr. Walter Hoffman feels the lack of a thorough forensic crime scene examination opened the door for the defense.
If the law enforcement agency doesn't ask for help and does it all on its own and then ships the body in for autopsy, a certain vital amount of information has been lost.
You lose the ability to really evaluate the scene, as it is found in a virginal state, before anyone has walked around it and done anything with it.
Dr. Embry, who performed the autopsy on Jack Wilson, didn't visit the crime scene.
Wilson, didn't visit the crime scene.
Although Dr. Embry continues to stand by his findings, he declined the opportunity to defend those findings for this program.
After Peggy Lowe's acquittal, James White recanted his confession.
In a signed affidavit he said, he never met or even spoke with Betty Wilson.
That he was never propositioned by Peggy Lowe to murder Dr. Jack Wilson.
And that he made it all up.
But he now says he was coerced into signing that statement, and has gone back to his original version.
He remains in an Alabama prison, eligible for parole in just a few years.
I pleaded guilty to the case, but I didn't kill the man.
But I knew about the situation.
So in a sense, I feel like that I'm here for the right reason.
James Innocent White would have sold his soul to get a good deal and avoid the electric chair.
I believe that's exactly what he did.
Two sisters, two trials, the same forensic evidence.
Yet, two different verdicts.
Betty Wilson has been in prison for the last four years, serving a life sentence with no chance of parole.
Her first appeal was turned down.
Another is pending.
Peggy Lowe hopes for the day her sister will get a new trial.
There's nobody there who cares anything about her.
There's nobody to put their arms around her.
There's nowhere for her to cry.
There's no privacy.
And the more things like that I realize, the more pain I feel for her.
It was a nightmare, and it hasn't ended yet.
I don't know that it will ever end.
Not for me. Not for my children.
For my precious grandchildren, or my mother, it will never end, never.
Between 1985 and 1988, 18 transients, hitchhikers, and prostitutes we're choked, sexually molested, and left for dead in the desert mountains of California.
The only witnesses, the insects of the desert.
And they also turned out to be extremely important pieces of evidence.
The women who had been choked unconscious and sexually molested were all dumped and left for dead in the high desert mountains near San Diego, California.
Not all of the victims died.
And those who survived, all described the same scenario.
Several of them had their pants undone and pulled down, bras were moved up exposing their breasts.
One lady had a nipple ring removed.
So we thought there had been some sort of sexual activity.
But because they were unconscious, we had no proof of it.
Betty Bass was one of the victims.
Nice seeing you too, love.
She's had a history of mental problems and is currently homeless.
But she can vividly recall the night, eight years ago, when she accepted a ride from a stranger.
After leaving this motel on El Cajon Boulevard, she looked for a ride going towards Ramona, California.
A man in a silver car pulled up and offered to take her part way.
I can take you as far as El Centro.
Good enough.
He had a clean car, so I thought, you know he was a pretty good guy, a pretty nice guy.
I just thought he was OK.
As they drove over the mountains, the driver said he needed to pull off the highway to take a bathroom break.
When the driver walked around the car, he asked Betty to grab something from the back seat.
As she did, he wrapped his arm around her neck and choked her.
The last thing she remembers was losing consciousness.
When she woke up, she walked up this hill looking for help.
So I walked and I walked and I walked.
Well, I finally crawled over this fence.
I crawled to the other side of the street.
Some family came by and put me in their motor home and aid me up a little bit.
And then they took me to the hospital.
The scene of the attack is right here in the dirt, right by this little knoll.
The car tire tracks stopped back here a few feet.
And then you could see footprints up into this area.
Her clothing-- some of her clothing was found here.
Police photographed the shoe and tire prints and also recovered two Marlboro cigarette butts.
On Betty Bass' shirt, detectives noticed a tiny red carpet fiber.
This attack sounded identical to another in the same vicinity just one month earlier.
Two young girls were hitchhiking together at a restaurant near the interstate highway.
A silver, compact automobile pulled up.
And a middle-aged man offered them a ride.
Where you girls going? -We're heading to Tucson.
I'll take you as far as El Centro.
Sounds good to me.
It was a ride they'll never forget.
It was my friend.
He strangled her.
Do you have any idea who he is?
A guy who picked us up hitchhiking.
This girl was fortunate.
She survived her attack.
And her friend, whom she feared was dead, was later found in the desert, frightened but alive.
The victims all provided a similar description of their attacker.
He was about early 40's, short hair, blondish-grayish color, glasses.
That's how they all described him.
Obviously these were people who are going to take a rides from anyone.
But many of them told us that they felt comfortable getting in the car with him.
And there were other similarities with all of these attacks.
The things he said to these women, it was almost like he had a script.
It was almost the same type of scenario.
I can only take you 40 miles.
I'm only going to El Centro.
The type of people he was victimizing were the vulnerable people in society.
Some people who were having mental problems, drug addicts, street people, hitchhikers.
Police had a description of the suspect, some tire tracks, and shoe print evidence but little else.
A sexual predator was loose in the mountains of California.
San Diego's El Cajon Boulevard, where prostitutes, runaways, and transients have congregated for years.
The reason, location.
It's close to a highway entrance ramp convenient for hitchhikers looking for a ride.
And it was here where many of the victims were picked up.
We had a series of live victims.
And we also had dead victims out there who we thought were part of the pattern.
We had what we thought was a pretty consistent pattern, common footprints, common tire tracks, the same type of victims being victimized, and certainly the same area where there were being picked up and dumped.
When detectives were called to Sheep's Head Mountain on July 21, 1988, they feared another in the series of choke and dump cases.
This time, the victim was dead and nude from the waist down.
She was found laying on the road here.
This was more dug out at the time.
The graders come in here every so often.
And she was more in the ditch type of thing.
The victim had been dead for quite some time.
Her skin was brown and blistered from the sun.
Her legs and feet were covered with blood.
It appeared the victim was alive before falling into the ditch because impressions of her arms flailing were found in the dirt.
Detectives noticed a blood trail and her bare footprints leading almost a mile up the mountain.
At the top of the mountain, detectives found a pair of shoes, some clothing, two sets of footprints, and signs of a struggle.
The footprints led detectives to a parking area where they noticed a tire track.
It looked as if a car had turned around before leaving the scene.
The victim's bare footprints led from the clearing into the brush.
Somehow she gets herself out of this area and then comes back up, and then finds her way down the main road.
On the body, investigators discovered some tiny clues.
Hundreds of live, worm-like creatures.
They were carefully collected and preserved, then taken to the forensics lab for analysis.
Was it possible these tiny insects could tell forensic scientists something about the victim's last moments alive or even when she was killed?
The autopsy revealed that the victim had probably been choked, but strangulation wasn't the cause of death.
The cause of death was actually a laceration of the vagina.
The mechanism would have been blood loss from that laceration.
The victim was identified as Sandra Swick, a 43-year-old transient from Florida.
Swick's body was found in the same general vicinity as many of the other choked and dumped victims.
All were found the same distance from the interstate highway, usually near a V in the road where the attacker could park without being seen by others.
Detectives still didn't have a suspect.
But three months after Swick's murder, detectives got an unexpected break.
While patrolling in the mountains, Sheriff's Deputy, Larry Daley noticed a car driving out of a deserted side.
Sheriff's Deputy, Larry Daley noticed a car driving out of a deserted side.
Daley turned onto the side road and saw a woman lying in the dirt unconscious but still alive.
I saw the victim lying on the ground, pants down passed her knees, her shirt pulled up to her neck as if someone had choked her.
Daley immediately called for an ambulance and put out a description of the car he saw driving from the scene.
After three years of frustration, could this be the break investigators were hoping for?
After finding the body of an unconscious woman in the desert, Sheriff's Deputy, Larry Daley rushed to his vehicle and called for help.
I also called out the description of the vehicle that I saw coming down the road towards me.
A short time later, this silver Honda was stopped by an officer who heard the call.
What I wanted to see was I wanted to see a monster.
I wanted to see this monstrous man, maybe someone with three arms, who came out and was abducting women and strangling them.
The driver was 41-year-old Ronald Porter, an automotive mechanic with a history of sexual offenses.
The woman found unconscious in the desert survived her attack and was able to identify Porter as her attacker.
Porter confessed to the attack but would not admit to any of the other attacks over the past three years.
Investigators believe Porter was responsible.
And they also suspected that Porter had murdered Sandra Swick three months earlier.
Sandra Swick three months earlier.
To find out if all these crimes were the work of one individual, San Diego authorities sought help from the FBI and their unit which specializes in studying serial murders.
Another offender would choose to abduct the same type of victim, bring her to the same type of location, do the same types of acts with them in the same locations, in the almost exact locations, it became pretty evident to us that the probabilities favored it being one person Larry Ankrom identified the remote desert dump sites as the signature element of all of the crimes.
Larry Ankrom identified the remote desert dump sites as the signature element of all of the crimes.
The attacker invested lots of time and effort into finding these remote locations.
Another signature element was the type of women he chose.
He's making an assessment before he decides he's going to go ahead and ask her if she needs a ride.
And when he's made that initial impression, then once he's decided, yeah, I can control this victim, then she gets in the car.
And then it becomes somewhat of a game with him to get her where he wants to go.
The FBI was convinced that all of these crimes were, indeed, the work of the same individual.
The next step was for San Diego authorities to prove that Ronald Porter committed these crimes.
The carpet fibers in Porter's car were microscopically similar to the red carpet fiber found on the blouse of Betty Bass.
Tire tracks found at some of the crime scenes were similar to the print on the spare Michelin tire found in the trunk of Porter's car.
And when searching Porter's apartment, police found shoes and boots with tread marks consistent with those found at some of the choke and dump crime scenes.
A walkie-talkie discovered in Porter's storage shed belonged to a woman who was choked and dumped in the desert mountains a few years earlier.
And the blouse, worn by that same victim, contained a semen stain.
A DNA analysis of Ronald Porter's blood matched the semen stain from the blouse.
But despite all of this evidence, prosecutors faced a major legal problem.
By the time police arrested Ronald Porter, the statute of limitations on most of these assault cases had run out.
If prosecutors were going to send Porter to jail for any length of time, it would have to be for the murder of Sandra Swick.
But the Swick murder was their weakest case.
Investigators found no semen, no blood, no hair or clothing fibers, which could link Ronald Porter to the Swick crime scene.
A tire track found at the Sandra Swick attack site was to faint for analysis.
However, some of the tennis shoe prints found at the Swick crime scene were similar to a pair of tennis shoes found in Ronald Porter's apartment.
But Porter's attorney says, a similar tennis shoe print is inconclusive.
But 5,000,000 other people with similar shoes, with similar treads, could also have made the print.
And the prosecution faced another problem.
They weren't exactly sure when Sandra Swick was murdered.
Time of death determination by a pathologist is a very inexact science, if it's a science at all.
There are certain changes the body undergoes.
And we can predict general time frames for those.
But there's a lot of different variables that affect it.
If prosecutors wanted to convict Ronald Porter of murder, they needed more.
Ronald Porter of murder, they needed more.
Could the tiny insects found on Swick's body tell forensic scientists when Sandra Swick died?
And tie Ronald Porter to her murder?
When detectives found Sandra Swick's body on Sheep's Head Mountain, it was badly decomposed.
Mountain, it was badly decomposed.
The hot desert air and sun had taken it's toll.
And hundreds of tiny worm-like creatures were feeding on her decomposing flesh.
Investigators wondered if these tiny creatures might offer some clues about when Sandra Swick died.
Detectives collected about 100 of these creatures and sent them to the laboratory of David Faulkner.
He's a forensic entomologist, an expert on insect activity on dead bodies.
They can tell you lots about where they've been, where the victim's been, how old the victim is, conditions of the body following death.
And those are the things that are interesting.
Faulkner's first task was to determine the age of these creatures, or maggots as they're called.
So he preserved some in alcohol at the exact stage of development as when they were found.
Eventually, the maggots would shrink and develop a hard shell.
And a week later, emerge as a winged adult.
Once Faulkner had an adult, he could compare it to the hundreds of different flies, which inhabit the California Desert where Swick's body was found.
After hours of study and analysis, Faulkner identified them.
Faulkner identified them.
The flies were Sarcophaga, also known as flesh flies.
All the things this particular group of flies will do is, they'll fly in very bad weather.
So if it's foggy, or rainy, or overcast they'll be active.
And they'll be searching out a potential host.
Whereas, other flies will probably settle and wait until the sun comes out or until it gets warmer.
Once Faulkner knew they were Sarcophaga, he could study the exact time frame of their life cycle.
The preserved specimens were in their third, or final, stage of larval development.
Once you have them identified, you know what stage of development the most developed ones are.
Then you go backwards and say, OK, this was the temperature regime at that time.
This is how long this particular insect takes to develop to this stage.
Therefore, that body was available, to these insects, for this amount of time.
Usually, that indicates how long a person's been dead.
In normal weather conditions, it takes a week for the baby maggots to develop to their third stage But the weather conditions in the desert are far from normal.
During the week Sandra Swick's body was discovered, the daytime temperatures averaged 92 degrees.
In 92-degree weather, it would take only 3 and 1/2 days for the freshly laid maggots to develop to their third and final stage.
And Faulkner was able to tell investigators something else.
The Sarcophaga never deposit their maggots in the dark.
They only do so in daylight.
I'm going to Florida.
This meant that Sandra Swick was still alive when the sun set on Sunday evening, July 17th.
But she was dead by daybreak on Monday morning, July 18th.
At the first sign of light, these flesh flies were attracted to the chemical scent of Swick's decomposing flesh and immediately laid they're maggots.
The maggots would not have done as developed if she had been alive longer.
If she had been alive Monday afternoon, Monday evening, there's no way that these flies, under those temperature conditions, could have developed to that stage.
Monday evening, there's no way that these flies, under those temperature conditions, could have developed to that stage.
Faulkner's conclusions provided police with a scientific time frame for Swick's murder.
Now, detectives could investigate Ronald Porter's whereabouts during the time of Swick's death.
Porter worked as a mechanic at this automotive chain store.
When his time sheets were subpoenaed, they revealed he was not at work on Sunday, July 17th.
In addition, Porter provided no alibi regarding his whereabouts on that day.
And it matched up.
We had a time period were Ron Porter was available to drive from the north part of the county down to pick up Sandra Swick and transport her to East County.
Based on the insect clues and the similarities between the Swick murder and the other cases, Ronald Porter was charged in the murder of Sandra Swick.
Ronald Porter was charged in the murder of Sandra Swick.
Prosecutors believe Ronald Porter picked up Swick as she hitchhiked somewhere near an entrance ramp to Interstate 8.
I'm going to Florida.
I can take you about 40 miles to El Centro.
That'd be great.
How you doing?
As the car traveled East into the mountains, Porter pulled off the main highway onto a dark, deserted road.
Porter pulled off the main highway onto a dark, deserted road.
He may have used some excuse, as he did in other cases, possibly the need to take a bathroom break.
As he walked around the back of the car, he surprised Swick from behind.
Grabbing her around the neck, in a military-type choke hold, he pulled her from the car and choked her until she was unconscious.
He threw her to the ground, removed her clothes, and sexually assaulted her with his hand.
He then returned to his car and fled.
Sometime later, Swick regained consciousness.
Dizzy, disoriented, and bleeding heavily from the attack, Swick walked barefoot down the dark, deserted road, walking almost a mile before collapsing.
Swick walked barefoot down the dark, deserted road, walking almost a mile before collapsing.
The blood trail was almost one mile long.
And she bled to death from lacerations suffered during the assault.
Her death had to be a tough one.
A very difficult, long dying process that she went through.
And the insect clues were able to provide detectives with the time of death.
Something they were unable to determine by any other means.
We find the defendant, Ronald Elliott Porter, guilty of the crime of murder.
Porter, guilty of the crime of murder.
Ronald Porter was convicted of second-degree murder in the death of Sandra Swick and was sentenced to 28 years to life in prison.
Ronald Porter continues to maintain his innocence.
The insect clues were an important element in their case against Ronald Porter.
And they told David Faulkner all he needed to know about Sandra Swick's brutal attack and murder.
Swick's brutal attack and murder.
You get a lot of information from them.
Whether a body's been moved, how long the person's been dead.
Or how long the body has been available to insects.
Whether the body has been buried, whether the person took drugs, whether they had been poisoned.
All these different sorts of things could be in the insects that are collected or removed from the body.
Eileen, who are in their sixties-- --a pathway from the home of Derek and Eileen Severs, who disappeared about three weeks ago.
Severs, who vanished without trace from their home in-- Despite a detailed search for a missing couple by police and hundreds of volunteers, it was the information found in some dirt which led police to their whereabouts.
Despite a detailed search for a missing couple by police and hundreds of volunteers, it was the information found in some dirt which led police to their whereabouts.
Derek and Eileen Severs were a wealthy retired couple who lived a life of English leisure in Hambleton, a small village about a two-hour drive from London.
The village sits on a narrow peninsula that juts out into Rutland Water, one of Europe's largest man-made lakes.
The woods and the lake make it a popular vacation destination, and the Severs had been living here for the past 20 years in a home known locally as The Bungalow.
Derek Severs had been retired for the past few years and was well known and well-liked among neighbors of the small village.
Doug Clements lived next door to the Severs.
I'd never met a better man than Derek Severs.
He liked a bit of horse racing and he loved a pint of beer.
Derek's wife, Eileen, was equally well known, not only as a volunteer for many local charities, but also as a kind and generous friend and neighbor.
Mrs. Severs was one of those people who spend all her time visiting people, doing things the charity.
She was always seen, everybody liked her.
Saturday afternoon, November 13, 1993 was the last time friends saw Derek Severs.
He was having lunch and a few pints of ale here at The Finches Arms pub.
Friends said Derek left the pub around 3:30 that afternoon, got into his car, and was headed straight home.
Eileen Severs was last seen on that same afternoon.
She left this church after attending a charity bazaar she helped organize.
Eileen told friends she, too, was headed home.
Five days later, after the Severs both missed some previously scheduled appointments, friends called the police.
This is the sort of place where if you're missing for a couple of hours, people want to know why.
Police immediately drove out to the Severs' home.
The missing couple's 37-year-old son, Roger, answered the door.
Yeah, Mom and Dad are on holiday in London.
Do you mind if I have a look around then?
Police took a quick look around the house.
There's no sign of a break-in, there's no sign of anything wrong inside the house.
By which you mean there's no sign of a struggle or anything.
No, nothing at all.
But friends weren't convinced that everything was all right.
The Severs had never gone away without first canceling their scheduled appointments.
It was not in their nature to go away without making arrangements, to tell people they were going away.
They weren't the sort of couple who would disappear without telling friends.
They would only say look, we're popping out, look after our house, because that's the sort of village that it was.
Derek, at times, he did go away, he used to leave me in charge.
He'd say look after the garden.
And neighbors said it was unusual for Derek and Eileen Severs to ask their son Roger two house sit.
Roger was a disappointment to his parents.
He was unemployed and had the reputation of being a con man, once telling a girlfriend that he was a gynecologist.
When police heard these stories, they decided to take a closer look around the Severs' home.
Six days after friends last saw Derek and Eileen Severs, the police decided to make a second visit to the Severs' home, this time in daylight.
The officers noticed that the backyard had recently been excavated, and there were signs of a fire in the garden.
And looking through the windows, we could see this kitchen carpet was missing, but it didn't add up.
So we decided that we'd use the police powers to go into the bungalow and have a further search.
Roger Severs told police that his parents left for London from the Peterborough train station.
Police went to the train station armed with a photograph of the Severs.
They asked the employees and regular passengers if they had seen the couple.
Mr. Severs was this very big man who walked very badly with the aid of a stick, and we thought that if anybody had seen them, they would run remember them.
But no one at the train station recalled seeing the Severs, and police found no evidence they even made it to London.
Already, local newspapers ran headlines about the Severs' mysterious disappearance.
The police suspected foul play, and decided to conduct a forensic search for blood inside the Severs' home.
Detectives noticed some suspicious dark stains on the side of the bathtub, and performed a Kastle-Meyer test.
A damp cotton swab is used to wipe the stain and then some phenolphthalein and hydrogen peroxide are added.
The sample of the stain found on the bathtub turned a bright pink, a positive presumptive test for the presence of blood.
The fact we'd found blood didn't necessarily prove conclusively that it had come from a violent action They could have-- one of them could have cut themselves in the bathroom, anything could have happened.
Police also noticed a blood smear on the back seat of Derek Severs' automobile, and the Kastle-Meyer test confirmed that stains on the garage door were, indeed, blood spatter.
Police noticed something else that was suspicious-- they found a large number of green fibers in the hallway inside the house, in the trunk of Mr. Severs' automobile, and on a pair of trousers believed to be Roger's.
The fibers were an important clue, because they did not match any items inside the house.
This was an indication that the source of the fibers had recently been removed.
The actual item itself was missing, so that if it-- as were the two Severs, Mr. and Mrs. Severs, so logic tells you that it's gone with the two.
It;s part of the crime scene.
The police were convinced that the Severs had been the victims of foul play, and suspected that Roger Severs knew more about his parents' whereabouts than he was telling them.
Investigators believed that Roger Severs was involved with his parents' disappearance, but they had no proof that a crime had been committed, and had no hard evidence suggesting where their bodies might be.
The search for the Severs began in their own backyard, since it appeared that the gardens had recently been excavated and there had also been some kind of fire.
You need a have very, very big fire to dispose of bodies, and there's no way they could be disposed of on there.
The police didn't find any human remains, but they did find small bits of carpet and clothing in the ashes.
It was like looking for a needle in a haystack, because all around there it is rural.
There's a huge expanse of water, lots of forest, trees, woods, open fields.
How on Earth do you find a body there?
Just when all of these searches turned up no clues, police finally got a break.
They learned of a strange event which occurred before the Severs were even reported missing.
A police officer on patrol recalled seeing a man in an isolated area called the Exton Avenue Woods.
Is there something wrong, sir?
The man matched Roger Severs' description.
No, I just needed to relieve myself, and then I decided to gather some leaf mold for the garden.
Well, then, move along when you're ready.
Will do so, Officer.
Good night.
The officer said the man acted suspiciously.
Well, any gardener, any horticulturalist will tell you don't want leave mold the end-- or in November.
It's not the time of year you're going to collect it, and certainly not at half past six at night.
So we--we assumed something had occurred up in-- in the Exton Avenue Woods there, so off we went to have a look.
Avenue Woods there, so off we went to have a look.
When they returned to the area of a few days later, they found a bloody towel near the spot where the man was seen collecting leaves.
But the police could find no evidence that the bodies were buried there.
We, uh, did a fingertip search of the entire area, and we never, ever recovered any further evidence from that scene.
The towel matched those in the Severs' house.
But without blood samples from Mr. And Mrs. Severs, it was difficult to know to whom the blood belonged.
It was challenging rather than frustrating.
When we--we wanted to find the bodies for two reasons-- one evidential, obviously, and secondly, of course, we-- you know, I think it's only right and proper if there's been a murder, we want the bodies for the relatives and everyone else.
But we-- you know, it's only right that we should be able to find them.
Late one night, Inspector Parmer studied the photographs of the Severs' automobile.
As he flipped through the photographs, something unusual caught his eye-- something suspicious about the dirt and mud on Mr. Severs' car.
The color of the mud just didn't look right.
This staining was a lot lighter in color than you would expect from a vehicle on road usage.
Generally speaking, a vehicle on road usage, it's a very dark black, dark gray dirty color.
This was a lot lighter color.
Was it possible that an analysis of the dried mud on the car might give police some idea of where the car had been?
To find out, detectives called in Doctor Tony Brown, a geologist at the University of Exeter.
Doctor Brown began his examination by collecting the soil, dirt, grass, and debris from the wheel wells of Derek Severs' automobile.
Under a microscope, Dr. Brown analyzed the samples and discovered tiny bits of vegetation mixed in with the mud, including minute pieces of moss, leaves, and grass.
There was even a small piece of fishing line.
It told us that it was a--a mixed deciduous woodland, probably oak dominated, but with also several other species.
It was clearly quite shady.
The moss could only come from a little shaded woodland, and there was also a fair amount of grass.
And at first that might seem to contradict the woodland, but that's likely to occur either at the edge of a clearing in a woodland, or towards the edge of a woodland.
And, of course, the fishing line suggested it was somewhere that fisherman parked.
And Dr. Brown discovered another microscopic clue-- more than 20 different types of pollen were mixed in with the mud from the wheel well.
Pollen is a fine, powder-like material which is produced by trees and plant life.
It functions as the male seed in fertilization.
To identify the pollen, Dr. Brown needed to isolate the microscopic pollen granules from the soil-- first, by using a series of filters and then by adding hydrofluoric acid, a chemical so powerful it can dissolve glass.
The acid dissolves away all remaining materials, leaving just the pollen.
Dr. Brown was able to identify most of the pollen in the sample-- oak, elm, and pollen from hawthorns were easy to identify just by sight.
However, he noticed one type of pollen he had never seen before.
I knew that I didn't know what it was, and then after that, of course, we-- we run through the normal process of identifying an unknown pollen type.
There are millions of different species of pollen.
Dr. Brown looked closely at the number and placement of the tiny slits, and compared them to the thousands of photographs of pollen samples in his library.
After looking through scores of samples, Dr. Brown found a match.
Dr. Brown found a match.
The pollen was from an unusual specimen-- from a tree not terribly common in England.
It was pollen from a horse chestnut tree, a tree native to Asia.
In my whole career of looking at samples from the East Midlands, I've never actually seen horse chestnut pollen from a sample.
Midlands, I've never actually seen horse chestnut pollen from a sample.
And there was something else unusual about the pollen from the horse chestnut tree-- it's a heavy pollen, and because of its weight, it's too heavy to travel far through the air.
It tends to float straight down to the ground, very close to the tree itself.
Since Dr. Brown found horse chestnut pollen in all four of the Rover's wheel arches, he was convinced that the car had recently been parked near a horse chestnut tree.
Police asked Dr. Brown to identify possible locations that had horse chestnut trees, as well as other vegetation matching the samples found in the Severs' wheel wells.
Dr. Brown identified five possible locations to search.
The first woodland searched was this one, the closest to the Severs' home.
But an entire day of looking here turned up nothing.
Next, they searched the second area Dr. Brown identified, a larger woodland near the lake.
Specially trained search teams worked their way down this hill.
When an officer poked a stick into one of the mounds, he found it to be unexpectedly soft.
He cleared away some leaves and loose soil to reveal a patch of human skin.
Police slowly uncovered the bodies of Eileen and Derek Severs.
Ironically, they were found lying on the bed of horse chestnuts.
Just a few feet away, there was stood a horse chestnut tree.
They were lying side by side, uh, and both of them were wrapped in green blankets.
Fibers in the green blanket matched the green fivers found in the Severs' hallway and on the trousers that belonged to Roger Severs.
The top layer of leaves and soil was similar to the soil found at the Exton Avenue Woods, where Roger Severs had been seen by police.
Severs had been seen by police.
Another layer of soil matched the soil in the Severs' backyard.
There was even a layer of roof tiles to stabilize the grave.
The tiles matched the roof tiles on the Severs' home.
Roger was then tied into every step of the progression from the murder to the burial.
All of the evidence pointed to the Severs' only son, Roger, who had a history of personal and financial difficulties.
He is basically penniless, certainly hard up, and we believe that he had turned up at the bungalow and maybe for the first time, we don't know, had been refused help by his parents.
What do you mean, too much?
On Saturday afternoon, November 13, while his father was at the pub, Roger argued with his mother in the kitchen.
He followed her to the bathroom and attacked, striking her eight times to the head, causing the blood spatter found on the bathtub.
Roger then wrapped his mother's body in a green blanket, dragged her body to the kitchen, leaving a trail of green fibers found on in the hallway and on Roger's trousers.
Derek Severs arrived home shortly afterwards, and when he did, Roger was waiting.
He struck his father ten times in the head, causing the blood to spatter onto the garage door.
Roger placed his father's body into the backseat of the car, where police later noticed the blood smear, and he put his mother's body in the trunk, where green blanket fibers were later discovered.
Roger drove his father's car to a deserted location in the woods, parked under a horse chestnut tree in an area used by fishermen, and then, dragged the bodies into the woods.
Roger wanted to limit the time he spent at the scene, so instead of digging a grave, he placed the bodies into a ravine and covered them with roofing tiles, fertilizer, and leaves.
But the most important piece of evidence came as Roger was driving away.
Pollen from the nearby horse chestnut tree flew up into the wheel wells of the automobile.
Roger Severs could never have imagined that this pollen would lead police to his parents grave.
Roger Severs was charged with murdering his parents and during the trial, took the witness stand and confessed.
His plea for leniency failed, and he was sentenced to life in prison.
The wife and I, we lost two good friends, and life's never been the same since.
I embarked on something which I saw as being rather simplistic, lined this vehicle with those man-made roads.
That was all I wanted.
I got a lot more, a lot more, and hopefully that's going to help a lot of people, investigators in the future.
Well, I think that the police now are certainly far more aware of the value of what otherwise might just be described as mud.
In a quiet English village a few hours drive from London, a threat was delivered to a local farmer.
Impaled on a fencepost, a severed lamb's head along with the message, you next.
The note said little about its author but, between the lines, it said plenty.
Nestled among the lush rolling hills of England's West Country, is the tiny village of Horton.
Country, is the tiny village of Horton.
A cluster of houses lining one main street.
A farming community where life is simple, quiet, and peaceful.
But in the spring of 1984, the peace and quiet was shattered, following a series of bizarre events that took place here at Widdenhill Farm.
44-year-old Graham Backhouse and his wife Margaret lived at the farm with their two children.
Backhouse had inherited the farm from his father.
But by all accounts, Backhouse, a former hairdresser, was not having financial success as a farmer.
He had to take over the farm.
He had no option on the business.
And there was a-- pretty obvious that he was a kind of reluctant, grudging, farmer.
But it was well known that, uh, the farm was not making money.
On March 30, 1984, Backhouse reported a grisly and terrifying discovery.
A severed lamb's head had been impaled on his fencepost, placed next to it, a note, warning in large, handwritten letters, "You next."
Backhouse told police that this wasn't the first time threats had been made against him.
He told me that he was receiving, um, telephone calls of a threatening nature, um, even threats to kill, as I recall.
Backhouse also told police about a threatening letter he had received in the mail.
I'm going to get you, bastard.
Less than two weeks later, the threats turned violent.
Margaret Backhouse was heading into town to do some shopping.
She decided to take her husband's car, because her car was having some mechanical difficulties.
Graham was in the barn and never heard the explosion or Margaret's screams for help over the music from his radio.
Aah-- aaahh!
The bomb was unsophisticated but extremely powerful.
It had been planted directly under the driver's seat.
Strictly speaking, it wasn't a bomb.
It was a shortened version of a shotgun.
It was constructed from a galvanized steel pipe, two inch diameter, quite a thick wall to the pipe.
Margaret Backhouse survived the explosion, because the force of the bomb was directed downwards by the high-quality construction of the driver's seat.
But doctors still had to remove more than a pound of pellets and shrapnel from Margaret Backhouse's body.
The bombings stunned villagers who now had to accept the fact that the threats against Graham Backhouse were serious.
When bonds go off, you've got to take it seriously.
And people were thinking that there must be something behind this.
It was the only possible conclusion that we all reached, that the bomb must have been for Graham Backhouse.
But who wanted Graham Backhouse dead?
On the same day of the car bomb explosion which seriously injured Margaret Backhouse, a threatening letter was delivered to the Backhouse farm.
And the message said something to the effect, came twice last week, but the pigs were about.
The note ended with the words, see you soon.
The words "twice" and "were" had both been misspelled.
And experts believed that the spelling errors were deliberate.
Investigators also examined the note found beside the severed lamb's head, the one which stated, you next.
An analysis of that note revealed a possible clue, an impression from a circular doodle.
When a doodle is made on a piece of paper, the pressure from the writing instrument leaves an impression on the pages underneath the original doodle.
Doodle impressions can be found using a technique called oblique lighting, which casts shadows across the indentations of the paper.
So that you can see the impression as a row of shadows.
And these can, then, be photographed.
Police asked Graham Backhouse to identify all individuals who may have wanted to harm him.
He was interviewed at some length about who his enemies were, who his ex-girlfriends were, and things of that nature.
Backhouse told police about one possibility, a former quarry worker named David Hodkinson.
Backhouse said he once had a sexual affair with Hodkinson's wife.
Hodkinson would have had access to explosives and was also an electrician who specialized in wiring automobiles.
On the day the explosion took place, this person was, in fact, out of the country on holiday, and had been out of the country for three or four days beforehand.
When Hodkinson's alibi checked out, police turned their attention to one of Graham Backhouse's neighbors, Colyn Bedale-Taylor.
He was a retired engineer, seriously depressed over the death of his 19-year-old son Digby who died in a car crash two years earlier.
Bedale-Taylor and Backhouse were involved in a bitter land dispute which they couldn't seem to resolve.
They lived 200 yards apart.
Colyn Bedale-Taylor was well liked in the small farming community.
He was a woodworker and handyman who built this bench for his friends in the village with the words "bide a while" inscribed on the backrest.
Despite the differences between Backhouse and Bedale-Taylor, police did not seriously consider him a suspect in the car bombing.
There was no reason to suspect that Mr. Bedale-Taylor was in any way, shape, or form involved in this instrument.
With no other leads, Backhouse and his family were given 24-hour police protection immediately following the bombing.
After a week, Graham Backhouse began to resent the police intrusion and asked them to end the around-the-clock protection.
Before they left, police installed an alarm button connecting the Backhouse home directly to the police station.
Just two weeks later, the alarm sounded.
Police cars began streaming up the hill.
We knew that something was seriously wrong.
When the police arrived at the farm, they saw a horrific scene of blood and death.
Blood was found on the kitchen floor.
Chairs has been overturned.
And at the bottom of the stairs, at the end of a hallway, lay the body of Colyn Bedale-Taylor, Backhouse's neighbor.
Backhouse's neighbor.
He had been shot twice in the chest.
In his right hand, firmly clutched, was a Stanley knife inscribed with his own initials, CBT.
Backhouse was bleeding profusely with gaping slash wounds on his face and chest.
Thought I'd pop in to see how your wife is faring.
She's doing very well, thank you.
He told police that Bedale-Taylor stopped by to ask how his wife was doing in the hospital following the car bombing.
Without warning, Colyn flew into a rage and attacked Backhouse with a Stanley knife.
You should have been the victim, not her.
He said he was doing God's work, blamed Backhouse for the death of his son, and admitted planting the car bomb.
Backhouse ran through the hallway, grabbed his shot gun, and shot Bedale-Taylor in self-defense.
Police roped off the farm and called for forensic detectives to conduct an examination.
They were particularly interested in the blood trails, the one they could see and the one they couldn't find.
Graham Backhouse told police that he killed Colyn Bedale-Taylor in self-defense after his neighbor went berserk and attacked Backhouse with the Stanley knife.
Colyn Bedale-Taylor in self-defense after his neighbor went berserk and attacked Backhouse with the Stanley knife.
Backhouse with the Stanley knife.
Backhouse said his neighbor admitted planting the car bomb and that it was intended for him, not his wife.
When police searched Bedale-Taylor's property, they found evidence linking him to the bombing.
We found a long section of pipe on grounds quite close to Colyn Bedale-Taylor's home.
And this matched the remnants of the bomb that were reconstructed.
The obvious implication was that the pipe bomb had been made by him and come from his land.
But forensic detectives were confused by what they found at the scene of the attack.
First, the blood spatter on the kitchen floor told a story.
But it was a story inconsistent with Backhouse's version of events.
The staining was predominantly in the form of small circular drips of blood.
The circular drops of blood found on the kitchen floor were not consistent with a struggle but indicated that the blood dripped from an individual standing still.
Blood dripping vertically to a surface during a passive act of bleeding will form circular spots or stains.
But if we have a violent movement of a body, a flicking of the hand, you see a different shape of stain.
They're more elongated.
And some of the stains will show a tail shape to them, pointing in the direction of trail that the blood impacted the surface.
And there was something missing.
Backhouse said he ran for his life from the kitchen, down the hall, to get his gun.
But police could find no trail of blood.
We seemed to have a man who was dripping blood profusely in the kitchen, manages to move over 15 foot of carpeted hallway without leaving any drips of blood.
And police were faced with another discrepancy.
Backhouse said he shot Bedale-Taylor after his face and chest had been slashed.
But his blood was not found on the gun.
Had he been attacked before firing the gun, blood from his face wound or from his hands would have dripped onto the gun as he fired in self-defense.
So both features missing from the gun suggested that he wasn't bleeding and hadn't blood staining on him at the time that he picked up that gun.
The victim was found clutching the Stanley knife firmly in his right hand.
The forensic pathologist found this highly unusual.
When somebody's shot or when somebody dies, they go limp.
Uh, so then, I would expect to see the response-- or the body's response to being shot twice in the chest and death taking place, simply, to relax.
And the knife would fall from the hand.
It wouldn't be clam-- clutched tightly in the hand.
And Bedale-Taylor's right palm was bloody.
When an individual holds a knife during an attack, the knife usually prevents blood from staining the entire palm.
There's an area of the palm which is either very lightly stained with blood or not stained with blood.
Um, the knife pr-- protects that part of the palm Backhouse's chest wound was also inconsistent with a struggle.
Backhouse's chest wound was also inconsistent with a struggle.
Because normally, if you're cut, you withdraw.
Your body jerks away.
So how on Earth are you going to get a wound which then travels almost half the circumference of the chest.
In a one-to-one confrontation, I would never expect to see that pattern of injury.
And Backhouse had no defensive injuries commonly found when a person fends off a knife attack.
They actually grab hold of the weapon itself.
And they get cuts across their fingers and the palm.
And sometimes you find that they've tried to block the weapon, put their hand out, and they get cuts on the back of the forearm, or the side of the forearm, on the back of the hand.
None of these were present here.
And there was something else, something small but significant.
When police searched Backhouse's study, they found a note pad.
On one of the pages was a circular doodle.
The ink doodle found on Backhouse's notepad was identical to the impression found on the "you next" note.
It was a whole series of circles, quite a complicated thing.
The impressions were quite deep so that you had a good photograph.
And you were able to get a good alignment.
And you could see clearly that it came from this doodle.
It was exactly the same.
There was no doubt whatsoever about it.
This is the doodle that we're talking about here.
Uh, you can see just various scribble.
When we turn to page, I think you can still see the impression.
This note is now very old and has been well-handled.
So it's not terribly clear now.
But it is still there.
Can just see it there, still see the impression just there.
Proof that the "you next" note was written on Graham Backhouse's own notepad.
Police believed they could now piece together the bizarre events which led to the cold-blooded murder of Colyn Bedale-Taylor.
After two straight years of crop failures, Graham Backhouse was 50,000 pounds in debt to a local bank and was in desperate need of funds.
Graham Backhouse was 50,000 pounds in debt to a local bank and was in desperate need of funds.
Backhouse devised an elaborate scheme to get out of debt once and for all.
His plan was to kill his wife and collect on her life insurance policies, which he had recently doubled to 100,000 pounds.
But he wanted the murder to appear as if Margaret has been killed by someone out to kill him.
So Backhouse fabricated the story about the threatening phone calls and letters.
Backhouse himself wrote the "you next" note and impaled the severed lamb's head on his fencepost, establishing the ruse that someone was out to get him.
With the stage now set, Backhouse turned his attention to the murder of his wife.
He planted a pipe bomb under the driver's seat of his own car.
He knew his wife would drive his car into town the next morning, because her car was having mechanical problems.
Aah-- Aaahh!
But Backhouse never expected his wife to survive the explosion.
Desperate and fearing the police would consider him a suspect, Backhouse panicked and decided to set up a scapegoat, someone to divert the police inquiry from himself.
Backhouse panicked and decided to set up a scapegoat, someone to divert the police inquiry from himself.
The logical choice was his neighbor, Colyn Bedale-Taylor.
How are you? -I'm fine.
Thanks for coming about the furniture I'm selling-- Villagers knew the two were involved in a land dispute.
Villagers knew the two were involved in a land dispute.
When Bedale-Taylor accepted Graham's invitation to discuss a piece of furniture, he had no way of knowing he had walked into a death trap.
Colyn, come here a minute. -Coming.
Aaah, gaa-- Colyn was shot twice in the chest in cold blood.
Colyn was shot twice in the chest in cold blood.
To make the shooting appear to be in self-defense, Backhouse slashed himself in the face and chest with a knife he had inscribed with his neighbor's initials.
Backhouse slashed himself in the face and chest with a knife he had inscribed with his neighbor's initials.
Bleeding profusely from the self-inflicted wounds, Backhouse overturned kitchen chairs to make it appear there had been a struggle, never realizing the shape of the blood spatter would indicate no struggle at all.
Backhouse overturned kitchen chairs to make it appear there had been a struggle, never realizing the shape of the blood spatter would indicate no struggle at all.
Backhouse's own blood was found on the victim's shirt, because he stood directly over the body when he placed the knife in the dead man's hand.
With the crime scene now complete, Graham Backhouse called the police.
Graham Backhouse called the police.
Sometime earlier, Backhouse planted a piece of pipe on Bedale-Taylor's property identical to the type used in making the car bomb.
When the forensic evidence contradicted Backhouse's version of events, he was arrested for both the attempted murder of his wife and the murder of Colyn Bedale-Taylor.
Backhouse's version of events, he was arrested for both the attempted murder of his wife and the murder of Colyn Bedale-Taylor.
In addition to the blood spatter evidence, the doodle impression found on Backhouse's notepad, and the medical examiner's opinion that the cuts on Graham Backhouse were self-inflicted, another crucial piece of evidence helped seal the case.
Backhouse were self-inflicted, another crucial piece of evidence helped seal the case.
It came from the letter delivered to the Backhouse farm on the day of the bombing.
Forensic detectives wanted to analyze the glued envelope for saliva, hoping to determine the blood type of the individual who sent the letter.
But they discovered much more.
Under the microscope, the fiber found in the envelope matched fibers found in a brown cardigan sweater owned by Graham Backhouse, further proof that Backhouse had mailed the threatening letter to himself.
Graham Backhouse's plotting continued from his prison cell.
He conned a fellow prisoner into smuggling out an unsigned letter to a local newspaper.
The letter implicated Colyn Bedale-Taylor in the car bombing.
But the letter was confiscated.
And Backhouse's handwriting matched the handwriting on the letter delivered to the farm on the day of the bombing.
After a 16 day trial, Graham Backhouse was convicted on all charges against him and received two life sentences.
If somebody'd set out to write a novel all along those lines, it would never have been accepted by anybody.
I mean, this is absolutely truth being stranger than fiction.
This was an outstanding case in many respects, principally, because without forensic evidence, there was no case.
The worst aspect was, of course, that he picked on a totally innocent man in the village, uh, and killed him for no other reason than to try to remove blame from himself.
And that's what made it a diabolical murder.
Shortly after daybreak in Vancouver, British Columbia, a fire was set to the contents of a garbage dumpster.
No one saw the arsonist or the fire as it burned for hours in the deserted parking lot.
But there was more than garbage in the bin.
And it would take sophisticated science to identify the evidence in the ashes.
When Milton Diaz walked towards the dumpster to empty some trash, he noticed that the bin was warm.
When he looked inside, he noticed a small charred figure in the corner, so badly burned it was beyond recognition.
I know something was burned.
But what was it?
Was it an animal?
Or was it a person?
If it was a person, it was too-- too terrible to happen.
It was too-- it was out of-- out of what I can conceive that someone would do to another human being.
The charred remains were carefully removed and taken to the morgue, where the gruesome and difficult task of identification would begin.
Straight away, we knew we wouldn't have fingerprints.
And we knew we wouldn't have the normal means to identify a victim, because of the condition of the body.
All that remained was the equivalent of 35 pounds of charcoal-like material.
It was an enormous challenge to Vancouver's medical examiner, Dr. Laurel Gray.
Well, obviously, we didn't have a whole lot to work with.
We had no idea what the cause of death was, whether it was related to the fire or some other matter.
During the autopsy, Dr. Gray could not find any recognizable skin, but did find a small patch of hair, where they had pressed against the floor of the dumpster.
It appeared to be reddish-blonde in color.
But the intense heat destroyed the hair follicles, which could have been used for DNA testing.
X-rays of the victim's skull revealed several pieces of metal and a fractured skull, evidence of gunshot wounds.
Bullet fragments, recovered from the brain, came from a .22 caliber weapon.
But they were so badly damaged, they could not be used for ballistic identification.
Police now knew that it was a homicide case.
The gunshots had caused, obvious, very severe damage to the brain.
They had fractured many of the facial bones.
There was a lot of blood in the-- within the facial bones and the sinuses.
The blood in the sinus cavities meant there was active circulation when the bullets entered the victim's brain, indicating that the heart was beating when the shots were fired.
But the intense heat altered the victim's blood chemistry, making it impossible for any kind of DNA analysis.
An examination of the victim's lungs showed no signs of smoke inhalation, which meant that the victim was dead before the fire.
The internal organs revealed that the victim was an adult female.
To help with the identification, investigators called in Dr. Larry Cheevers.
He's a forensic odontologist who was asked to study the dental remains of the victim.
This was a victim of an inferno-- an absolute, unqualified inferno.
There was virtually nothing left.
But when Dr. Cheevers looked closer, he was surprised to see, beneath the charred surface, that the jawbone and teeth were intact.
Because they are surrounded by barriers-- there's saliva in the mouth, the gases in the stomach expand and pushed the tongue out, and the outer muscles of the face become quite leathery.
And so the one thing that's survives, above all else, is the teeth.
By studying the growth patterns of the teeth and skull, Dr. Cheevers estimated that the victim was between 24 and 30 years of age.
And when Dr. Cheevers looked closely at the x-rays, he discovered an important clue.
The victim had an extremely rare dental condition called mesiodens.
It's an extra tooth which never grew into place on top of the two front teeth inside the gum.
The x-rays also showed a lot of high-quality dental work.
When you start talking 48 hours past the finding of the body and you don't have an idea of the suspect is, and at that stage, we didn't know who the victim was, you start thinking, well, it's going to be a long haul.
And it's going to be a difficult case.
Greg Middleton covered the search for the identity of the victim and her killer for the "Province Newspaper"
They told me, at the time, that they thought that there was no hope of solving it.
That there was-- they had so little to go on, that they didn't think that they were going to get anywhere.
Police now had a horrific murder, but still couldn't identify the victim or her murderer.
When the police reviewed all recent missing persons reports, one in particular caught their eye.
It was for a 30-year-old woman named Lynn Breeden.
She had blonde hair, and was last seen on the day before the charred remains were discovered.
When the dental records for Lynn Breeden were compared to those from the charred remains, doctors noticed the same extra tooth above the gumline on top of the front teeth.
And the dental work matched the burn victim, as well.
Dr. Cheevers was convinced that Lynn Breeden was the person burned in the fire.
There was absolutely no doubt in my mind, the minute I saw the mesiodens there, and then, obviously, the other dental work.
And they all added up to the fact that this was the same individual, or the same unfortunate victim.
Lynn Breeden was a part-time model who once posed for "Playboy Magazine."
She worked here, at a men's club called Number Five Orange, as a cocktail waitress.
A lot of her friends were able to tell us about her background.
Unfortunately, I think she had gone the cocaine route in the city of Vancouver.
And I think she was well involved in the use of cocaine.
Lynn Breeden was last seen late Friday night, walking along Robson Street in Vancouver.
Police learned that Breeden's former boyfriend lived on Robson Street in this apartment building.
His name was Chris Paycook, and he was well-known to police.
He was a local drug trafficker.
He was certainly one of the last persons to be seen with her.
During police questioning, Paycook admitted he was with Lynn Breeden for most of the night on the Friday in question.
Paycook admitted he was with Lynn Breeden for most of the night on the Friday in question.
He said she stopped by his apartment.
They had a few drinks, talked for a while, and ended up having sex.
Afterwards, they wanted to Celebrities Nightclub.
And later to a small after hours club.
Paycook said Lynn was behaving badly, flirting with other men.
And after an entire evening of it, he became angry.
That's it. We're leaving.
Aw, let her stay.
Back off, man.
I don't want to leave. -No.
We're leaving.
I get you high and you're going around with these guys?
I don't think-- I said back off! We're leaving.
I'm not leaving, this-- come on.
We're having a great time. -You're such trash.
I'm having a good time.
He left the club without her and said, that was the last he saw of her.
In that m it was a dead end.
He looked really good to begin with.
But when we confirmed his alibi and his story, yes.
It turned out to be a dead end as far as he was concerned.
But detectives received an interesting tip from the manager of Lynn Breeden's bank.
A woman had posed as a Lynn Breeden attempting to withdraw all of the funds from her account.
I got up to the counter and I-- I asked to help her.
And she signed a withdrawal slip, like, for like $4,000-- basically, what Lynn had in her account.
And it wasn't Lynn.
Security photographs showed the impostor looking out the window, possibly at an accomplice standing outside.
But glare from the sun hid the identity of whomever was outside.
The woman left the bank quickly when her identity was questioned.
We went to our fraud squad said, do you know this person?
And we did all those investigative things, in case this was a chronic fraud suspect, and somehow, some way, we could come up with a name through that avenue of investigation.
That didn't give us an answer.
Police launched an all-out effort to find the woman who posed as Lynn Breeden.
It was their only lead to the murderer.
The local newspaper published a photograph of the woman who posed as Lynn Breeden at the bank, and asked anyone who knew her to come forward.
Within hours, an anonymous tip identified the woman in the photograph as Tonya Forrester.
Given that information, we went to her, told her what we were dealing with, and asked her for her cooperation, and why she was in there taking the-- or attempting to take the money for the victim's account.
Tonya Forrester told police that she was given Lynn Breeden's wallet and identification by a man named Chris Cruz who told her it was stolen.
Chris Cruz who told her it was stolen.
Together, they agreed to clean out her bank account before it was reported missing.
She was unaware, at the time, that that was the victim of a homicide's bank account.
Chris Cruz was an unusual character.
He was a model and actor, a student at the University of British Columbia who was planning to attend medical school.
But Chris Cruz also went by the name of Tony Devons, the stage name he used as a stripper and professional escort.
He reportedly had a healthy appetite for cocaine.
Cruz told police that he had been out on the night the Breeden's murder.
First, at the Love Affair Nightclub, and later, at the same after hours club that Lynn Breeden and her boyfriend attended.
Breeden and her boyfriend attended.
Cruz said you only stayed for 20 minutes, before leaving in a taxi cab to see a girlfriend.
The next day, he said a friend offered him the contents of Lynn Breeden's purse, telling Cruz it had been stolen.
We asked him, can we search your car?
And he said, yes, we could.
We asked him what kind of a car it was, and he gave us the description, a gray Oldsmobile.
We asked him where it was, and said, well, it's not running very well.
It's out at my grandmother's place in Surrey.
But Cruz didn't know that he had been under police surveillance.
They knew he had driven his car to police headquarters for questioning and parked it right down the street.
Initially, you think, why is he lying?
So the car must be playing a part in the lie.
So we looked that up.
And that was secured overnight.
When photographic experts reprocessed the bank photograph to remove the window glare from the sun, police could see the individual standing outside when Tonya Forrester attempted to withdraw Lynn Breeden's money.
Tonya Forrester attempted to withdraw Lynn Breeden's money.
It was Chris Cruz.
And when forensic detectives inspected Cruz's car, they found blood on the outside of the car, and even more on the inside.
Inside the trunk-- I think he was basically living out of the vehicle for some time-- it was his own clothing, but there was evidence there that you could only hope for in any homicide case.
Police also found a .22 caliber rifle, a five gallon gasoline container in the trunk, and a suit jacket Cruz was seen wearing at the after hours club.
Inside the pocket police found a Playboy bunny pendant stained with blood.
It was similar to one Lynn Breeden wore in this photograph.
Many items inside the car were covered with blood-- the spare tire, clothing, a photo album, and a tire iron found in the backseat.
In spite of all the evidence, police had a serious problem.
They had no way of knowing what to whom the blood in the car belonged.
Now our difficulty, in this case, is what was it we were going to compare it to?
Because the normal things that we would use from an autopsy and the toxicology exhibits were so badly damaged that the DNA exhibit from those toxicology exhibits was not possible.
If the police couldn't figure out a way to match the blood inside Cruz's car to Lynn Breeden, it was entirely possible that Chris Cruz would walk free.
Police had a lot of circumstantial evidence linking Chris Cruz to Lynn Breeden.
They found blood in his car, on his clothes, and they found hair and blood on a tire iron found in the backseat.
It was just incredible how much evidence we had.
And it would be an absolute shame if the suspect had been successful, so successful in destroying the body, that none of that evidence could be used in order to tie him into the crime.
The fire not only incinerated Lynn Breeden's body, but also, any chance of a DNA profile.
Her skin, blood, saliva, and hair follicles, all possible areas for DNA testing, had all been destroyed.
Dr. David Sweet is a forensic odontologist who had been following the Breeden murder in the newspapers.
He suggested that scientists try something which had never been attempted before.
That they try to harvest the genetic material from inside Breeden's teeth from the tooth pulp, in order to generate a DNA profile.
They ran with the idea, released some evidence to me in the forms of some bones and teeth.
I was particularly interested in the impacted wisdom teeth, or the teeth that were still embedded in the jaw bone-- both the upper jaw bone and the lower jaw bone.
It was my sense that these teeth we're more protected from the fire then the other tissues and the other teeth, because they were deeper in the core of the body, away from the potential heat source.
The pulp was sent to the forensics lab, along with samples of blood collected from Chris Cruz's car.
I never thought, for a second that tooth pulp could be used, or any tooth-- part of any tooth could be used for DNA testing.
Blood cells were extracted from the tooth pulp and treated with a special chemical cocktail.
And the DNA floated free-- a sticky bundle of complex molecules.
Next, the DNA was cut into smaller pieces, marked with a radioactive dye, and placed in separate lanes on an electrophoretic gel, where it was subjected to an electric field.
The separated fragments are then visualized on x-ray film, called an autoradiogram, which resembles a bar code.
When scientists compared the blood DNA found in Cruz's trunk, on his jacket, and on the photo album, it matched the DNA profile of Lynn Breeden.
It was very clear.
The match showed that the DNA typing profile from the various exhibits submitted to me matched that of the DNA typing profile from the tooth pulp from the victim.
Based on the forensic evidence, Chris Cruz was charged with the murder of Lynn Breeden.
Chris Cruz was charged with the murder of Lynn Breeden.
At the after hours nightclub, Lynn Breeden and her boyfriend Chris Paycook got into an argument when she flirted with some other men she met there.
Chris Paycook got into an argument when she flirted with some other men she met there.
Now just back off!
Following the argument, Paycook left the club alone.
Paycook left the club alone.
Witnesses said, Lynn was looking for cocaine that night.
And at some point, made the acquaintance of Chris Cruz.
There was some evidence that the two already knew one another.
Both were models, frequented the same night spots, and reportedly shared an appetite for cocaine.
Shortly after daybreak, they left after hours club together.
And some sort of disagreement took place, possibly over payment for some drugs Cruz may have provided.
I know. I know.
I know. I know.
As they drove home that morning, police believe their argument escalated.
You're gay! -Look, no.
Cruz stopped the car, and the disagreement turned violent. -It's my money.
My money, now!
In a rage, Cruz grabbed a tire iron from the trunk and struck Breeden on the head and face.
As Lynn Breeden lay near death with a fractured skull, Cruz grabbed his .22 caliber rifle and shot her three times in the head.
Cruz grabbed his .22 caliber rifle and shot her three times in the head.
Cruz placed the body into the truck, and drove to the deserted parking lot, where he dumped the body inside a garbage bin, and emptied a five gallon container of gasoline he kept in the trunk.
No one saw the fire as it burned for hours, shortly after daybreak on July 6, 1991.
According to the fire department, the fire was probably one gallon of gas away from a total cremation.
And looking at the victim at the time of the discovery, you would have to believe it was close to a full cremation.
And without the scientific evidence the remains might have gone unidentified, and the blood in the car unmatched.
Absolutely, it made the case.
It did the ultimate link-up to all of this evidence that we were so happy to find to our victim and the murderer.
And the case broke new ground for forensic scientists, since it was the first time that DNA evidence from a tooth was used in a criminal case.
Chris Cruz was convicted of second-degree murder in the death of Lynn Breeden, and sentenced to life in prison.
Lynn Breeden was a very beautiful girl.
And a lot of people acknowledged that.
In fact, there were a lot of areas where she could have gone, and things that she could have done, as a result of it.
Unfortunately, she get caught up in a little bit of this cocaine problem.
And the result was that it brought her to the circumstances that led to her death.
Very tragic.
Chris Cruz, himself, a good looking man, a lot going for him.
He had attended the university here in town.
And he was doing what he could, that way.
So that was another spoiled life, really, by him being involved in what had taken place here.
Again, as a result of the drug involvement.
If you take away the drugs, I don't believe any of this would have happened.
So Steve, I see you have your breakfast of champions there with you.
Janet McDermott planned to stop by her office only briefly on the morning of October 15, 1985.
Have a nice day, Steve.
She had a number of business appointments around Salt Lake City that day.
Moments later, an explosion rocked the building killing her colleague, who worked next door.
Science uncovered a tail of forgery, fraud, and murder.
The explosion occurred on the sixth floor of the historic Judge Building in downtown Salt Lake City.
Killed in the blast was 31-year-old Steve Christensen, a financial consultant who left behind his wife Terry and a young family.
Terry and a young family.
He was lying in the doorway of his office, and he was lying on his right side, burn marks on his face, smoke marks, and blood.
The explosion ripped the door off its hinges, and the location of the debris told investigators that the blast occurred directly in front of Steve Christensen's office door.
You could tell the precise location where the bomb exploded.
Match that with the autopsy, and we could tell where the bomb was when it because of its shearing power-- breaking bones, going through skin, things of that nature.
Small pieces of batteries and fragments of pipe were found in the hallway as well.
Many of the parts had the name Tandy imprinted, a brand sold exclusively in Radio Shack electronics stores.
All of the fragments were collected and pieced back together revealing that the explosion was caused by a pipe bomb.
This is a replica of the type, which was used.
But who wanted to kill Steve Christensen, and why?
Christensen had recently resigned his job as Vice President of Consolidated Financial Services, or CFS, a real estate investment company which was undergoing serious financial difficulties.
Services, or CFS, a real estate investment company which was undergoing serious financial difficulties.
Many clients had lost large sums of money, and some were alleging fraud.
In the debris, police discovered a piece of brown wrapping paper with Christensen's first name written in thick black marker.
Bruce Passey had a jewelry business a few floors below Steve Christensen's office.
He told police he noticed something unusual in the elevator that morning.
I told them that I saw box this morning that had the name Steve Christensen, and that my father and I went up in the elevator with the gentleman holding this box.
Steve Christensen, and that my father and I went up in the elevator with the gentleman holding this box.
Janet McDermott recalled seeing the package in the hallway directly in front of Steve Christensen's office door.
Christensen's office door.
A motion-sensitive mercury switch was found in the debris, an indication that the bomb was activated by tilting the package.
Motion-sensitive bombs are almost always delivered by the bombers themselves so they can be delivered without going off.
Bruce Passey described the delivery man as a white male, about 5 feet 8 inches tall, with medium brown hair.
Once he came in, I mean, he was wearing a high school letter jacket without the letter on it, but it had the colors of a letter jacket.
I was just very concerned for the business community and that other people might be involved on a revenge type situation, whether it be for investments-- or uh, gone bad, or something similar to that.
And I was worried who would be the next victim.
That worry became reality just two hours later.
Two hours after the bombing which killed Steve Christensen, there was another explosion across town.
This time, the victim was 50-year-old Kathy Sheets.
Her husband, Gary, was the former business partner of Steve Christensen.
It was real devastating to have your mother killed on your front doorstep.
You feel that you're safe in your home, and that it's OK, and to have something like that happen really shattered your faith that things are OK.
Once again, the fragments recovered at the scene were consistent with a pipe bomb.
Police found scraps of brown paper near the blast with the name of the victim's husband, Gary Sheets.
The time I got the second scene, I already know what I was looking for if they were going to be similarities.
I already know what I was looking for if they were going to be similarities.
Within 25 minutes, I had found similarities.
Within five hours, I found a component.
That component was a very small piece of a mercury switch.
A mercury switch was found at the Christensen bomb site as well.
A mercury switch is a glass ball filled with mercury, a liquid metal.
When the mercury is tilted, it completes the electrical circuit, triggering the explosion.
We had a lot of similarities, and they would include the cardboard container, the types of tape-- more than one type.
The size of the pipe, that which includes the diameter and the length.
The explosive inside, the type of explosives inside.
Gun powder from both bomb sites were sent to the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms lab for analysis.
They store samples of every known gun powder manufactured.
The particles of gunpowder from the pipe bombs were placed on a profiled projector which measures the size and shape of the granules.
When this information was entered into a computer database, the gun powder was identified as Hercules Bullseye brand.
The same type was used in both bombs.
Since Radio Shack batteries and electrical components were found at both bomb sites, detectives checked all of the Radio Shack stores in the Salt Lake City area.
Records show that an individual by the name of Mike Hanson had recently purchased the same components from this Radio Shack store in Holiday, Utah.
The store had an address for Mike Hanson, but it was a vacant lot, and detectives suspected that the name was an alias.
The only individual reported seeing anything suspicious at the Sheets home was a 13-year-old neighbor, Aaron Teplitt.
He told police he saw a tan Toyota minivan turn into the Sheets' driveway around midnight, the night before the bombing.
He said the van drove out of the Sheets' driveway a few minutes later, but the boy could offer no description of the driver.
I think we have a serial bomber out there.
What was entering into my mind was, how soon are we going to have another bombing?
It was very short wait.
While investigators were sifting through the rubble of the bombings which killed Steve Christensen and Kathy Sheets, there was a third explosion the very next day.
Sheets, there was a third explosion the very next day.
This time, it happened in a parked car in downtown Salt Lake City.
The victim was 30-year-old Mark Hofmann, a rare documents dealer.
Unlike the other two victims, Hofmann survived the blast.
Hofmann's injuries were severe.
The explosion blew off the tips of two fingers.
A portion of his right kneecap was missing, and a piece of metal was embedded in his knee.
Mark Hofmann said that he pulled open the door, and the package fell from the seat of the car onto the floor board of the car, at which time it exploded, and he was injured.
Mark Hofmann had no connection with the CFS Corporation.
He was a well-known and respected rare documents dealer who specialized in early Morman currency and documents.
But Mark Hofmann and Steve Christensen knew one another.
Christensen was a collector of rare books and documents, and had purchased some items from Hofmann over the years.
One thing detectives knew-- the bombs which killed Steve Christensen, Kathy Sheets, and seriously injured Mark Hofmann were all made by the same individual.
They also knew that evidence inside Mark Hofmann's car was inconsistent with what he told police.
Hofmann said someone placed a package on the seat of his car, and when he opened the car door, the package fell onto the floor, and exploded.
But when a pipe bomb explodes, the end caps blow out in a straight line.
One of the end caps blew a hole through the side door on the passenger's side.
The other end cap was found in Mark Hofmann's knee.
This important detail told investigators that the bomb did not explode on the floor of the car as Hofmann indicated.
Didn't line up with exploding bomb.
We can't change that, because of the holes in the vehicle.
That's a true.
It's now taking the injured pieces of the individual, putting them so they come in contact with the bomb.
The injury to Hofmann's knee indicated that his right knee was on the driver's seat at the time of the explosion.
And the injuries to Hofmann's fingers indicated that he had been touching the bomb when it exploded.
So now we have an injured hand, an injured leg, and I know the altitude the pipe bomb was in.
I also know that he has uninjured body parts.
Uh, the other leg is in very good shape.
There's not even any burn damage.
So I have part of him outside the car, part of him inside the car.
The evidence revealed that the bomb exploded over the center console, in between the two front seats, and not on the floor of the vehicle as Hofmann indicated.
When police searched Mark Hofmann's home, they found a high school letter jacket with the letter missing, similar to the one Bruce Passey saw on the delivery man in the elevator on the morning of Steve Christensen's murder.
Even more alarming, police discovered the Hofmann owned a tan-colored Toyota minivan, similar to the one the teenage boy saw driving into the Sheets' driveway the night before the bombing.
Inside Hofmann's van, police discovered a single flake of gunpowed.
Tests revealed that it was Hercules Bullseye gunpowder, the same type used in making the pipe bombs.
We had no idea why Mark Hofman, if he were the perpetrator, would kill a close associate and friend of his, Steve Christensen.
And for all we know, he didn't even know Kathleen Sheets.
Hofmann told police that he was a victim, and even took a lie detector test to prove his innocence.
We've had him take a polygraph, and he passed with flying colors.
Not even close-- he had passed with a high number saying that he was not deceptive and he did not do the bombings.
Despite the polygraph results, investigators were suspicious of Mark Hofman, since the scientific evidence was inconsistent with his description of the bombing.
On the day of Steve Christensen's murder, Mark Hofmann was scheduled to meet with Mormon church officials to discuss some early Mormon documents he was selling, known as the McClellan collection.
Mark Hofmann was scheduled to meet with Mormon church officials to discuss some early Mormon documents he was selling, known as the McClellan collection.
Steve Christensen was active in the Mormon church, and was asked to attend that meeting in order to certify that the documents were authentic.
As I was inquiring about who examined the documents, it was my feeling it had never been examined forensically.
George Throckmorton was asked to do just that-- to use scientific forensic methods to find out whether some of the world's leading experts had been fooled.
Despite the fact that Mark Hofmann passed a lie detector test, bomb experts from the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms were convinced that Mark Hofmann was inside his automobile, possibly arming the bomb when it accidentally exploded.
Tobacco and Firearms were convinced that Mark Hofmann was inside his automobile, possibly arming the bomb when it accidentally exploded.
The scientific evidence supported their theory, but missing, was a motive.
How you prove Mark Hofmann was a murderer, is you first prove that he was a con man, that his whole life was based upon fraud.
George Throckmorton is a forensic document examiner who was asked to examine the rare documents Mark Hofmann had sold over the years.
Hofmann had sold over the years.
He compared them to other rare documents the Mormon church had in its vault from the same time period in which Hofmann had nothing to do with.
Under ultraviolet light, many of the documents Hofmann sold turned blue.
This was not the case with the documents the Mormon church obtained from other sources.
Under a microscope, Throckmorton noticed that the ink on Hofmann's documents ran in one direction.
In the other documents, the ink was absorbed by the paper uniformly, spreading in all directions.
And Throckmorton discovered microscopic cracks in the ink on the documents Hofmann uncovered.
Throckmorton calls it alligatoring, and there was none of this in any of the other documents.
At this point, it made us say something's wrong, but we don't know what.
Why are Hofmann's documents different than the other documents?
When Mark Hofmann's home was searched following the bombings, police discovered a book which contained the recipe for iron galitanic ink, an ink that was common in the 1800's.
Throckmorton made a batch of that ink and wrote with it on some paper.
He then applied an ammonia solution, which is known to age paper.
The test document displayed the same blue haze under ultraviolet light.
And when it was hung to dry, the ink ran in one direction and exhibited the same alligatoring condition as the Hofmann documents.
Finally, Throckmorton turned his attention to "The Oath of a Freeman," believed to be the oldest printed document in the United States.
It was a document Mark Hofmann said he purchased in a used bookstore and was valued at over $1 million.
It had been authenticated by both the Library of Congress and the FBI.
When Throckmorton looked at it closely, he found a curious anomaly.
There was a tiny flaw in the letter M.
That microscopic flaw was not caused by old age, was not caused by printing problem, it was caused through the photographic process.
Therefore, that document had to go through that photographic process.
The flaw looked like emulsion on a photographic negative.
This modern printing method did not exist in 1638, when "The Oath of a Freeman" was allegedly written.
Therefore, it had to be counterfeit.
Inside Hofmann's home, police discovered a receipt from a printing company in Utah.
It was for a printing plate for "The Oath of a Freeman" document.
The printing company thought the plate was used to print facsimiles.
In fact, it was.
Hofmann took the plate, added the old ink recipe, and a piece of old paper to create the forgery, and offered for sale as an original.
On the receipt was the name, Mike Hanson, but it included Mark Hofmann's telephone number.
It was the same name used at the Radio Shack store to purchase the bomb components.
Throckmorton's forensic document examination proved that Hofmann was a fraud and a forger.
Prosecutors believed that Steve Christensen was onto Mark Hofmann and was about to expose him as a liar, and possibly, a fraud.
Hofmann and was about to expose him as a liar, and possibly, a fraud.
Hofmann sensed this and decided to murder Steve Christensen with the a pipe bomb.
But Hofmann wanted Christensen's murder to appear to be business related.
So he delivered a diversionary bomb to Christensen's former business partner, Gary Sheets.
The boy living across the street saw a van similar to Hofmann's pull into the Sheets' driveway around midnight.
Hofmann placed the pipe bomb package on the front walkway to the Sheets' home.
The next morning, Hofmann delivered the primary bomb to Steve Christensen's office building.
It was packed with more than a hundred masonry nails, leaving no doubt that its intent was to kill, not injure.
The jewelry store owner identified Mark Hofmann as the man wearing the leather jacket in the elevator.
He was carrying a package addressed to Steve Christensen.
Hofmann left the package outside Christensen's office door.
It was armed with a motion-sensitive mercury switch set to explode when tilted at a 45 degree angle.
Have a good day, Steve.
Steve Christensen picked up the package when he arrived for work.
Two hours later, Kathy Sheets noticed the package left outside her home addressed to her husband Gary.
Mark Hofmann was arrested and charged with two counts of murder and for theft by deception for selling forged documents.
Hofmann pleaded guilty to second degree murder, and was convicted.
A parole board recommended that he spend the rest of his life in prison.
Ironically, many of Hofmann's forgeries are still on the market.
Every single document that I looked at had been forged or manipulated in some way to make it valuable.
And I looked at over 600 of his documents.
Every single one of them was forged.
He never found a single genuine document, ever.
And the deception turned a mild-mannered documents dealer into a killer.
I think Mark is probably the most evil of people that I've worked with.
Serial bombers, by and large, are much more evil.
They don't want to just hurt you, they want to continue to hurt many people.
And how common is it for a bomber to blow himself up when handling one of his own bombs?
Not common enough.
After a day of fishing in a small, quiet village in Switzerland, a teenage boy did not return home as planned.
The investigation revealed some important microscopic evidence in the water, near where he was last seen.
It was the only forensic evidence detectives had.
Late in the afternoon of August 4, 1993, in the small Swiss village of Neuparadies, 13-year-old Dario Cicolecchia left his home to go fishing in a nearby creek.
13-year-old Dario Cicolecchia left his home to go fishing in a nearby creek.
As night fell on the town, Dario had not returned home.
And his mother called the police to report her son missing.
When we found the bike and his clothing, we concluded that he had last been fishing there.
Where and with whom he could have left the place, we had no idea.
Two days passed and the search intensified with more than 100 policeman patrolling the area with search dogs.
A missing person poster aired on local television.
And the newspapers asked, where is Dario?
As time passed, people feared the worst.
To us, there were clear indications that a crime had taken place because of the objects found, his bike and his trunks.
Search teams meticulously combed the field next to the creek where Dario's swim trunks and fishing pole had been found.
Farther downstream, police found Dario's tee-shirt on the bank.
A dam was placed in the creek in order to search the muddy bottom for evidence.
Many items were discovered but nothing that could be linked to the missing boy.
Two nights after Dario was reported missing, two women were walking a dog along a field path near Switzerland's border with Germany.
They saw what appeared to be blood.
Just a few feet away in a nearby cornfield, lay the naked body of a young man.
When I got the message from these two women, we immediately sent a police officer to check the site.
When he reported that the body was that of a young man, we realized that it might be Dario.
The body was positively identified as Dario Cicolecchia.
He had been sexually mutilated.
I certainly will never forget this all of my life, that terrible site.
It was quite obvious from the beginning that it was a sex crime.
This could be seen from the injuries.
There were cuts and bruises also in the genital area.
When the medical examiner arrived at the scene, he concluded that the cuts on the body were consistent with a pocket knife, but were made some time after the boy was dead.
I found on the body a lot of long cuts, side-by-side, and this helped me to think that the boy did not move during the cuts were made.
On the other hand, there were no defensive wounds.
Although blood had been found near the body, Dr. Wyler believed it wasn't enough blood to indicate that the boy's heart was still pumping when the mutilation took place When there is no heart action and no circulation in the body, there is no possibility to-- to bleed very much.
Dr. Wyler believed it wasn't enough blood to indicate that the boy's heart was still pumping when the mutilation took place When there is no heart action and no circulation in the body, there is no possibility to-- to bleed very much.
When there is no heart action and no circulation in the body, there is no possibility to-- to bleed very much.
With no evidence of a struggle, police suspected that Dario had been murdered somewhere else and the body transported to the cornfield.
Police found Dario's sneakers in the cornfield.
But they did not find the knife used in the mutilation.
We were greatly alarmed.
Such crimes are frequently repeated if the killer is still at large.
We therefore started immediately with a very thorough search of the environment.
Police could find no foreign hair, fibers, or semen.
But Dr. Wyler swabbed the inside of Dario's mouth for possible forensic evidence.
When he analyzed that sample, he discovered some microscopic evidence.
It was a discovery that would change the course of the investigation and launch a new era in crime science.
After Dario Cicolecchia's mutilated body was found lying in a cornfield, Dr. Daniel Wyler analyzed the forensic evidence from Dario's mouth.
Something under the microscope caught his attention.
Diatoms are a type of algae, microscopic organisms that live mostly in the sea, in ponds, lakes, and streams.
They can also be found on moist rocks, even in mud and soil.
These tiny organisms are the most diverse of all algae.
Globally, they account for approximately 25% of all photosynthesis.
There are about 16,000 different species of diatoms worldwide, about 3,000 species in Switzerland alone.
Diatoms can tell scientists about past environmental conditions in fresh water and marine environments as long ago as tens of thousands of years.
And in the case of Dario Cicolecchia, Dr. Wyler hoped that the diatoms found in his body would reveal something about his murder.
Dr. Wyler hoped that the diatoms found in his body would reveal something about his murder.
I was absolutely sure that this boy was drowned.
In the lungs, I found a lot of mud.
And this helped me to see that he has been in water with a lot of mud.
So it can't be a very deep lake or something like that.
It must be a creek or a small river or something like that.
Diatoms were also found on Dario's sneakers, which were in the cornfield near his body.
The next step was to see if the diatoms in Dario's lungs and on his sneakers could help determine the exact body of water where Dario had been murdered.
To find out, Dr. Wyler called on the expertise of Dr. Jocheim Hurlimann, a biologist who specializes in the study of diatoms.
Hurlimann, a biologist who specializes in the study of diatoms.
You can look to the diatoms in the lung.
And you see the species.
And the species give you information about the-- the type of river or lake, the water quality.
Dr. Hurlimann was asked to analyze the diatom populations in Dario's lungs and sneakers, as well as those found in water samples from the region.
If he could find significant similarities, investigators would know the exact location of his murder.
If you have a high similarity, you know that the two samples must come from the same place.
But with as many as 3,000 different species of diatoms in Switzerland alone, Dr. Hurlimann would have to test water samples from the nearby bodies of water to make an accurate comparison.
To be very sure that there is no other pond or river or creek which has the similar or the same diatom community.
So if you look to other water bodies, and you won't find the communities, then you are quite sure that this special place was the place of the-- of the drowning.
Water samples were collected from the surrounding bodies of water, including the Rhine River, which flows between the creek and the cornfield where Dario's body had been found.
The water samples were treated with acids to kill any organic matter in the diatoms, leaving their glass-like skeletal remains, a necessary step in identification according to species.
Under the microscope, Dr. Hurlimann compared the diatom populations found in Dario's lungs and on his sneakers to the thousands of known species in his reference journals.
He found one dominant species.
The diatoms were identified as Fragilaria pinnata, a fresh-water species, usually found attached to sand grains in slowly moving water.
The next step was for Dr. Hurlimann to count and identify the diatom populations from the various water samples, using an elaborate chart.
It was a tedious process.
But eventually, he found one body of water which had as its dominant species Fragilaria pinnata, the same dominant species found in Dario's lungs and on his sneakers.
It was from a water sample taken from the creek just a few feet away from where Dario's bicycle was found.
This discovery led Dr. Hurlimann to one conclusion.
We can say that the diatoms found in the lungs of Dario must be from the same place we have taken samples from the creek.
Was it possible that the diatom evidence could tell investigators more than simply where Dario was murdered?
Could the diatoms lead investigators to the killer?
Armed with the diatom evidence found inside Dario Cicolecchia's lungs and on his sneakers, police concluded that he had been forcefully drowned in the creek where he had been fishing, before being mutilated and dumped in the cornfield.
The question now, who murdered Dario?
And how was the body transported to the cornfield a few kilometers away?
Police questioned friends and acquaintances of the victim.
We questioned about 200 persons, both in Switzerland and Germany.
Of course, the family were also investigated, as it is always done in such cases.
Also, in case no responsible person is found, to clear the family that no suspicions remain with them.
With no strong leads or suspects, Swiss police informed Interpol of the case.
Swiss police informed Interpol of the case.
Interpol is an international agency headquartered in France that shares information about criminal investigations with 178 nations who are members of the network.
As the body was found so close to the border, it was possible that the murderer might have come from or gone to a foreign country.
It was a difficult case.
Interpol was also informed of the case.
Three months after the murder of Dario Cicolecchia, Interpol notified Swiss police of a possible lead.
Interpol notified Swiss police of a possible lead.
A man had been arrested in France for sexually assaulting a hitchhiker and trying to kill him.
He was identified as 35-year-old Roland Kubler, a psychiatric nurse who was divorced and the father of a five-year-old girl.
What caught Interpol's attention was the fact that Kubler lived in Switzerland, not far from the village where Dario Cicolecchia was murdered.
When Dr. Wyler heard of Roland Kubler's arrest, he suggested something unusual.
He told the Swiss police to examine Kubler's car.
The car is still in-- in Switzerland.
So I asked the police whether it's possible to get the pedals of the car and the carpet in the trunk, to bring all that stuff to Dr. Hurlimann.
It was clear that the people who has done this drowning, that he must have the items on his shoes, on his clothes, or in his car.
Forensic scientists collected microscopic debris from inside Kubler's car, including material from both the gas and brake pedals, the carpet in the passenger compartment, and the carpet from the trunk.
When Doctor Hurlimann analysed those samples under a microscope, he made a surprising discovery.
He found diatoms.
They were found on both the gas and brake pedals, in the carpet under the pedals, and in the carpet in the trunk.
When he analyzed the diatoms found in the car, he discovered they were Fragilaria pinnata, the same dominant species found in Dario's lungs, on his sneakers, and in the creek.
With 3,000 different species of diatoms in Switzerland, the similarities in the diatom evidence was significant.
We know now that the material found in the car must come-- or is similar to the one of the lung of Dario and to the material found in the creek.
Armed with this microscopic evidence, Swiss police confronted Roland Kubler.
Swiss police confronted Roland Kubler.
He denied he had anything to do with Dario's murder and said he only knew about the crime from what he read in the newspapers.
But during questioning, Kubler revealed details of Dario's wounds, details which had never been reported in the newspapers.
Roland Kubler knew too much.
When confronted with the discrepancy, Roland Kubler confessed to the murder of Dario Cicolecchia.
Roland Kubler confessed to the murder of Dario Cicolecchia.
A picture now emerged of what took place at the creek the day Dario disappeared and how his killer left behind a microscopic trail of evidence.
Dario disappeared and how his killer left behind a microscopic trail of evidence.
During police interrogation, Roland Kubler confessed to both the murder and mutilation of Dario Cicolecchia and his longstanding sexual fantasies about young boys.
He is, in simple terms, a pedophile.
And he has suppressed his homosexual tendencies for years.
And when he lived his fantasies he had to kill the victim in order to keep a secret.
On August 4, 1993, Dario rode his bicycle to the creek near his home for an afternoon of fishing.
He left his bike near the main road and headed down to the water.
Roland Kubler was on vacation and had been drinking heavily when he drove in the area where Dario was fishing.
Kubler spotted Dario's bike and told police, just knowing a young boy was in the area excited him greatly.
Kubler parked his car and walked to where Dario was fishing.
After a brief conversation, Kubler approached Dario again.
He attacked the young boy, pushing him into the water, forced him to undress, and sexually molested him.
Then, Kubler forced Dario's head under the water into the mud of the stream bed.
With his knee between Dario's shoulder blades, he kept the boy submerged until the struggling stopped.
Kubler decided not to leave the body at the scene of the crime.
Instead, he placed the boy's body into the trunk of his car and left for a social engagement with his ex-wife.
Little did Kubler realize, he had left behind a trail of evidence, microscopic, single-cell evidence, which would link him to the scene of the crime.
From the moment Kubler pushed his victim into the creek, microscopic diatoms in the water attached themselves to the soles of his shoes.
And diatoms in the water flooded Dario's mouth and lungs when he was forcefully drowned.
Kubler transferred those diatoms from his shoes to the pedals of his car when he drove away.
And diatoms from Dario's mouth would later seep onto the carpet in the trunk in which he was transported to the cornfield.
Dr. Wyler's discovery of the diatoms and Dr. Hurlimann's species identification in the laboratory were essential elements in tracking down a vicious killer.
Roland Kubler had silenced his victim.
But the diatom evidence spoke volumes.
I am proud that I found these diatoms.
It was a very, very good feeling for me to have found a scientific way to prove something which was very important to find a murderer.
We know that we didn't make big mistakes or errors in the determination or in the preparation of the-- all the samples.
So it was-- at this moment, it was a good feeling, of course.
This case, therefore, became sort of a model case, also worldwide and, particularly, in Switzerland.
It had never been done in this way before.
We were pioneers.
And we certainly hope that it will be possible to solve other cases in the same way for the future.
Roland Kubler confessed not only to the murder of Dario Cicolecchia but, also, admitted killing another boy in the same area of Switzerland 10 years earlier.
Kubler was convicted of both crimes and was sentenced to life in prison.
Candles burn near the creek where Dario died, a shrine built by villagers to keep Dario's memory alive.
And in a nearby churchyard where Dario is buried, his sculpture reminds visitors of the gentle, innocent child who died too soon.
Whenever children are the victims of violent crimes, it's much, much worse.
And this must be the same all over the world.
In 1984, a young couple got lost searching for a campsite in Virginia's Blue Ridge Parkway.
They decided to spend the night sleeping in their car.
They were awakened by a white male in his mid '30s at 3:00 AM.
Step out of the vehicle.
What the couple saw that night, their eyewitness description of the assailant, was all that police had to go on.
When the 19-year-old woman and her 22-year-old fiance were rousted from sleep, they assumed the man was a policeman.
Move to the rear of the vehicle, please.
Blinded by his flashlight and concerned that they had broken the law, they handed over their car keys as ordered.
Suddenly, the man produced the gun and told the fiance to run into the woods.
He threatened to kill him if he didn't obey.
The young woman, now terrified for her life, was forced at gunpoint into the man's vehicle.
Open the door.
Open it. Get in the back.
Keep your head down.
Don't look at me.
He drove her to a secluded campsite about a half hour away.
That's far enough.
On your knees.
And over the next two hours, repeatedly raped and sodomized her.
Why are you doing this to me?
Although the assailant had threatened to kill her, he left her on a deserted stretch of road and told her how to get back to her car.
She was traumatized, but alive.
Is there anything that you remember about this guy, his appearance, his demeanor?
The victim said that the rapist wore camouflage pants, had a large cross around his neck, and during the assault, chain-smoked, drank whiskey, and babbled incessantly about a Lieutenant Kolecki and their experiences together in Vietnam.
Kolecki and their experiences together in Vietnam.
Kolecki, in that war, hell.
For all of us.
The victim and her fiance helped a police sketch artist prepare this composite drawing of the assailant.
Police all across Virginia searched for a man who fit the description.
But the search turned up nothing, and police feared that the Blue Ridge rapist would never be identified.
Four months passed, and in nearby Roanoke, Virginia, there was another sexual assault.
The victim said her attacker looked a lot like one of her neighbors, Edward Honaker.
Honaker had an alibi for the rape in Roanoke, and was quickly eliminated as a suspect.
But investigators noticed a striking resemblance between Edward Honaker and the composite drawing of the Blue Ridge rapist.
Honaker owned an automobile similar to the one driven by the Blue Ridge rapist.
It had no back seat, and had rust damage on the body, consistent with the description given by the victim.
The car he was driving, one of those big Broncos, was identified by the victim as, as a car driven by the rapist.
He had a mustache, so did the rapist.
He was about the same size, height, weight, as the rapist.
Um, the case seemed to point directly at him.
Police prepared a photographic lineup of six individuals to show the victim and her fiance.
They both identified Edward Honaker as the rapist.
He had camouflage.
The rape victim and her fiance both identified Edward Honaker as the rapist from the photographic lineup.
Honaker was a 34-year-old welder with a dishonorable discharge from the military, and a past history of burglary.
He had recently been hospitalized for depression, because his wife had left him, taking their three children.
When Honaker was questioned about the rape in the Blue Ridge Parkway four months earlier, he didn't immediately offer an alibi.
Ridge Parkway four months earlier, he didn't immediately offer an alibi.
Later, he said he was asleep in his mother's home in Montvale, 78 miles away.
78 miles away.
Honaker owned an automobile similar to the assailant's.
And from his home, police recovered clothes and jewelry similar to those worn by the Blue Ridge rapist on the night of the attack.
She described the assailant as having worn fatigues.
Fatigues were recovered at his home.
She described him as having a cross about his neck, a cross of a-- she also said that he had told her when this assault was over that he was going back to the Roanoke area.
And Honaker was living in and about the Roanoke area.
The final step was to compare the hair found on the victim's shorts with Edward Honaker's hair.
The expert there stated that they were very likely a match.
And that was very strong evidence against him, as well.
The last thing I told my mother was, don't worry about it.
I'll probably be home tomorrow evening, or the next day.
I thought I would go to a lineup or something, and the lady, the victim, would say, no, this isn't the guy.
But something else happened when Edward Honaker faced his accuser for the first time in court.
He was identified in a crowded courtroom, the preliminary hearing, by the fiance and the victim.
They both identified him in court, picked him out.
Not seat-- not standing in an orange suit up front, but mixed in among the rest of spectators in the courtroom.
Get out of here.
Honaker's defense lawyer noted that Honaker was right-handed, and the assailant held the gun in his left hand.
The assailant ranted about his experiences in Vietnam, but Honaker was never in Vietnam.
The defense also presented evidence that Honaker had a vasectomy, which meant he could not have produced the sperm found on the vaginal swab.
But the prosecution said the victim and her fiance had consensual sex a few days before the rape.
The sperm could have belonged to the fiance.
For the jury, it was an easy decision.
The most damaging piece of evidence came when the victim took the stand.
Henry Connor was the jury foreman.
She looked right at the defendant, looked him in the eye, so to speak.
And said, that is the man who raped me.
And we had no reason to doubt her, because she was very, very sure.
I had a lot of animosity toward her and her boyfriend.
I just, I couldn't understand why they had done this to me, why they had chosen me for this.
And I just, I, I don't know.
I just, I had a lot of hatred for, for both of them.
Edward Honaker was found guilty of rape, sodomy, and aggravated sexual battery, and was sentenced to three life terms plus 34 years.
The judge stated that Honaker's hair found on the victim had sealed his fate.
While Honaker was in prison, he continued to proclaim his innocence.
Months went by, then years.
Over time, Honaker's attention turned from proving his innocence to simple survival.
You can't show fear in prison.
If you do, you'll be preyed upon.
There are some of the world's best predators locked up in a prison cell.
And they will take advantage of you.
They can, they will spot it, I think someone said once, quicker than a lion can spot a limp.
Over the next five years, Honaker sent letters to journalists, lawyers, and criminal advocates all across the country, pleading his case to anyone who would listen.
Honaker sent letters to journalists, lawyers, and criminal advocates all across the country, pleading his case to anyone who would listen.
No one responded.
Honaker never gave up hope, but was out of ideas.
Until one day, on television, he watched the trial of Timothy Spencer, the so-called South Side Strangler.
I had watched that trial.
And I told a friend of mine at the prison, Floyd.
I said, Floyd, this is my, this is my salvation.
This is the answer that God has given me through all of my prayers, is this DNA.
But Honaker wasn't sure if the vaginal swab from his rape case had been preserved.
And if it had, could it still be tested after all those years?
Five years after Edward Honaker was convicted of a rape he said he didn't commit, one of his letters made its way to Kate Germond of Centurion Ministries, an organization that works on behalf of the wrongfully convicted.
Centurion Ministries receives thousands of letters from convicted criminals every year.
But there were a number of things about Honaker's case that caught Germond's attention.
Eyewitness testimony, in our country, is considered, by most people, to be the most profound proof of truth.
That's the man that did this to me.
We all assume, I think through the years we've come to believe that our mind is like a videotape.
That it just accurately records whatever we see, whatever we hear, whatever we come in contact with.
The reality is, what our memory is actually recording is, yes, what's going on in the moment.
But it's also mixed into that is memories, dreams, um, some little distraction.
It's just a huge variety pack.
So our memories are actually not accurate at all.
When the victim chose Honaker's picture from the photo lineup, Honaker was the only one standing in front of a white background.
The other suspects were all photographed in front of the standard height scale.
Research has shown that if one item in the array of photographs is uniquely different, such as the background, it is more likely to be chosen.
Furthermore, police lineups should include faces that have an equal chance of being selected, faces similar to one Honaker's photo was the only one of six that remotely resembled the description given by the victim.
Honaker's photo was the only one of six that remotely resembled the description given by the victim.
The mugshot spread that was shown to both the victim and her boyfriend, in my opinion, is one of the most tainted mugshot spreads I've ever seen.
Centurion Ministries asked the state of Virginia to release the forensic evidence used to convict Honaker.
And they asked hair expert, Dr. Peter DeForest, to analyze the hair found on the victim's shorts, which the state of Virginia said matched Edward Honaker's hair.
I compared the unknown hair taken from the victim with a known sample of Mr. Honaker.
And assuming that the known sample was representative of Mr. Honaker's range of variation, I would have eliminated Mr. Honaker as a donor of that hair from the victim.
I would have eliminated Mr. Honaker as a donor of that hair from the victim.
And forensic scientists agree.
There is no such thing as a hair match.
You cannot match hair.
There is no such thing as a hair match.
The most that you can ever say about hair testimony, hair evidence, is that it is similar or dissimilar.
It is consistent or not consistent.
That's it.
And their investigation uncovered something else.
We also learned that the victim had been to a hypnotist to have her memory hypnotically refreshed.
The hypnotist, um, notes in a letter to the prosecutor that the victim was brought to him because she could not recall the face of her assailant.
Hypnotically-enhanced recollections are inadmissible as evidence in most states, including Virginia.
The victim's identification of Honaker should not have been presented to the jury.
But when the victim pointed Ed Honaker in the courtroom, it practically ensured his conviction.
The victim was very, very convincing, and very, very credible.
And I think she, uh, beyond all shadow of a doubt, made the difference in the jury's, uh, I know, in my own case.
And there was, I don't think, uh, there was ever any real doubt, uh, in the minds of the jurors about, uh, about the guilt of Mr. Honaker at that time.
Barry Scheck was convinced that DNA testing would prove Honaker's claims of innocence.
But prosecutors and Honaker's new defense team were in for another surprise, when the victim changed her story, once again.
By the time Centurion Ministries completed their investigation of Edward Honaker's case, he had spent almost nine years in prison for a crime he said he didn't commit.
Centurion Ministries gained access to the vaginal swab taken from the victim on the night she was raped, and sent it to Dr. Edward Blake at Forensic Science Associates near Oakland, California.
Associates near Oakland, California.
They also sent along a sample of Edward Honaker's blood.
Centurion Ministries paid for the DNA testing, which was approximately $5,000.
Dr. Blake needed to identify all of the genetic markers on the swab, and then determine whether Edward Honaker could have provided any of the markers present.
Dr. Blake performed a DNA test called polymerase chain reaction, or PCR.
It's a test used when the sample is small or has been degraded over time.
PCR is ideally suited to what you might consider historical investigations.
That is investigations that are maybe more than five years old.
Dr. Blake assumed that the cotton swab contained cells from three individuals, the victim, her fiance, and the rapist.
After Dr. Blake analyzed the DNA from the swab, he did not believe that Edward Honaker was the rapist.
The conclusions that could be reached from the analysis of the vaginal swab alone was that the sperm, uh, could not originate from Ed, Edward Honaker.
But Governor George Allen wasn't so sure.
He asked the Virginia State Crime Lab to conduct their own analysis.
Lab to conduct their own analysis.
And they found something in the tests they hadn't expected.
We were not as absolute in the conclusion that Forensic Science Associates originally came to.
We felt that there were some other scenarios that might possibly explain the results.
The Virginia Crime Lab noticed some genetic material they could not identify or fully explain.
It was a 3, 4 genetic marker found in the sperm fraction of the PCR test.
The mixture of all of the DNA profiles, and the similarities presented by the combinations of the genetic materials meant that Honaker could not be eliminated as the contributor of the 3, 4 genetic marker.
Faced with competing scientific opinions, Governor Allen asked police to go back over the investigation one more time.
Governor Allen asked police to go back over the investigation one more time.
As Governor, you want to make sure that you have all the evidence, and have it investigated, talk to the witness, look at the evidence, run whatever tests can be done on the evidence, so that I have the full story.
When investigators re-interviewed the victim and told her that DNA testing of her vaginal swab revealed some inconsistencies, she made a surprising confession.
After the rape, she married her fiance.
But they had since divorced.
She admitted that at the time of the rape, she was sexually involved with another man in addition to her fiance.
It raised the question about whether or not the sperm taken from the victim's vagina had any relevance to the sexual assault on her.
That's how Ed Honaker gets brought back into the suit.
When DNA testing is done in rape cases, all of the consensual sexual partners have to be identified.
What we have to account for and understand is that in taking samples like this, one has to account for, um, prior consensual, sexual intercourse.
And therefore, one has to account for the DNA types of those individuals.
Sheriffs located the second boyfriend, took his DNA sample, and scientists performed a more sophisticated DNA test called a poly marker test, which types five genes at once, instead of just one or two.
The poly marker DNA tests showed conclusively that Edward Honaker was not the contributor of the 3, 4 genetic marker.
Edward Honaker was innocent.
In October of 1994, Governor Allen called Honaker in prison and told him he was a free man.
He said, I feel that that jury made a mistake.
He said, as of this moment, you are a free man.
What he said after that, I have no idea.
After 10 years in prison, Edward Honaker walked out of the Nottoway Correctional Facility into the arms of his family and friends.
Edward Honaker walked out of the Nottoway Correctional Facility into the arms of his family and friends.
He had missed the last 10 years of his children's lives.
It was a grow miscarriage of justice.
The evidence of his innocence was just overwhelming.
You'd have to be complete fool to miss it.
There are many, many limitations on the testimony of eyewitnesses, particularly in situations where-- where, uh, there's a great deal of not only physical trauma, but emotional trauma.
That's not a place for people to make careful, critical observations.
I always knew, deep in my heart, that I would one day get out of prison, a free man.
Not only, not only get out of prison, but proven that I did not commit that damn crime.
I always knew that.
On a cold December night in 1993, Rose Larner left a convenience store on her way to a boyfriend's house.
Rose Larner left a convenience store on her way to a boyfriend's house.
But she was never seen or heard from again.
Rose Larner's disappearance remained a mystery, until a tiny clue found years later uncovered a tragic tale of drugs, romance, and revenge.
Rose Larner was the second of three children in a broken family.
She was a highly intelligent but very difficult teenager.
Rose Larner was an 18-year-old girl who liked to spend a lot of time out at night with her friends, away from her family, a family that dubbed her the vampire because they only saw her in the daytime.
Rose's best friend, Bill Brown, was a boy she had known since second grade.
They remained friends even after high school.
The first girl I ever got a kiss from.
Her and two other girls came down to our house and they chased me through the woods.
And my brothers held me down and she gave me a kiss.
And we was just basically friends.
We had crushes on each other but um, nothing seriously.
I mean, we were just kids.
After high school, Rose worked at a pizza shop in her hometown of Lansing, Michigan, and started dating a friend of Bill Brown's, John Ortiz Kehoe.
It came on quite polite.
He was a local star-- rap star.
I mean, everyone thought he was just it.
You know, this was John Kehoe.
And um, when I first met him, I thought he was nice-- I thought he was all right.
Rose, John Kehoe, and Bill Brown were inseparable, spending their days and most of their nights together.
For a time, Rose and John Kehoe lived together.
But the relationship didn't last.
Kehoe moved out, and Rose was devastated.
John, at some point, decided that he-- he wasn't interested in Rose.
And tried to break it off.
Um, Rose wasn't real keen on that idea.
On the night Rose disappeared, she stopped in to visit her mother, who was working at the convenience store.
Rose said she was headed to the home of her friend, Keith, who lived nearby.
She walked up to my work and told me she was walking over to a boyfriend she had at the time.
Her and John were split up.
And um, and I asked her not to.
I told I had a bad feeling about tonight, and to go back and get the van.
But she didn't want to do that.
Rose preferred to walk that night instead of driving, and did not return home.
The next day, Rose Markey called her daughter's friend Keith, who said that Rose never showed up.
Keith, who said that Rose never showed up.
Rose didn't show up for work that day, either.
Rose ran on the wild side.
She was independent, rebellious, and it would not have been out of the realm of possibility for her to have simply left the area and gone and looked for another lifestyle.
Rose Larner made approximately 1,500 telephone calls every month, but no one heard from her after she disappeared.
Nobody heard from Rosey.
And the detective that was assigned the case-- that was his sign that there was something wrong there.
Cause um, he said that someone like this doesn't break a habit like that.
Rose Larner's mother still hoped for her daughter's safe return.
Perhaps something in Rose's phone records would provide a clue.
After two weeks went by with no word from Rose Larner, Lansing police began one of the most intensive searches ever undertaken in Central Michigan.
Lansing police began one of the most intensive searches ever undertaken in Central Michigan.
They dragged area rivers, coordinated search teams to look for clues in the surrounding neighborhoods, and investigated every lead.
The persistent rumors-- Rose is in so-and-so's backyard.
Rose is in so-and-so's basement.
And I'll admit, we dug up a few basements and drained a few gravel pits looking for Rose.
With nothing-- came up dry every time.
Police learned that Rose Larner spoke with her ex-boyfriend, John Ortiz Kehoe, on the night she disappeared.
Kehoe had an alibi for that night.
He was on a date with another woman.
Bill Brown was with Kehoe and his date on the night Rose disappeared, and corroborated Kehoe's alibi.
For the next two and a half years, police could find no trace of Rose Larner.
You're simply stymied, you're stalled.
That was where the police were at the time, two and a half years after she disappeared.
The state police began their investigation with a fresh look at Rose's ex-boyfriend, John Ortiz Kehoe.
They quickly discovered that Kehoe and Rose Larner had an unusual relationship, one that continued even after they broke up.
In one incident, Rose followed Kehoe to this fraternity house, near Michigan State University.
Kehoe was on a date with another woman.
In a fit of anger, Rose drove a van into the side of Kehoe's truck.
She was smashing her mother's van into his truck, breaking out his windows.
We'd come by my parents' house and she'd be hiding behind trees.
Police also learned that Kehoe and Bill Brown were in business together-- the drug business-- and had customers all over Michigan.
We, as a task force, put a lot of pressure on Bill Brown.
I mean, we were talking to family members.
We were talking to friends.
We were talking neighbors.
We were talking to all kinds of people that hadn't been approached before.
Brown and Kehoe were together on the night Rose Larner disappeared.
But police did not believe that Brown had told them everything about their activities that night.
I knew it was going to be very hard, very, very hard, for them to be able to get a case.
I knew the only way would be is if people starting talking.
Bill Brown originally said he knew nothing about Rose Larner's disappearance.
But two and a half years later, under constant police pressure, he changed his story.
And it was a story so shocking, few believed him.
When Bill Brown was sitting there in the office, we were hearing things that we had never heard before.
It was an eye-opener.
After listening to his whole story about what happened to Rose Larner, I literally went home and told my wife that I felt like I'd just met Satan.
I literally went home and told my wife that I felt like I'd just met Satan.
You know, I almost stopped on the way home and went into a church that I didn't belong to.
It was-- it was the most unsettling thing that I've ever been through, to listen to that.
And police needed science to determine whether Brown was telling the truth.
After two and a half years of searching for Rose Larner, Bill Brown finally revealed what happened on the night she disappeared.
Bill Brown finally revealed what happened on the night she disappeared.
Brown said that on December 7, he unexpectedly ran into Rose Larner near the convenience store.
Rose told Brown she wanted to see John Kehoe.
Rose is begging to page John.
And so I finally do.
I page John.
And she asks me to ask John to come pick her up.
John says the only way he'll agree to that is if she agrees to have sex with both of us.
Brown said Rose agreed.
They drove to John Kehoe's grandparents' home, because they were away on vacation.
Rose changed her mind about the threesome.
When she did, Brown said Kehoe murdered her and dismembered her body.
Brown said they cleaned every square foot of the house, removing all of the blood, bone, and debris.
Later, they drove to a cabin owned by Bill Brown's parents, where they burned Rose's body.
Afterwards, they spread Rose's ashes along miles of highway throughout Michigan.
Brown said he didn't come forward sooner because he was afraid Kehoe would murder him as well.
Alls I wanted to do is get away from him.
I just wanted to get away from him.
And after that he basically kind of kept me hostage.
I mean, he wouldn't let me out of his sight.
After two and a half years, police finally have the break they were hoping for.
But they needed to know if Brown was telling the truth.
He'd been involved in the drug scene, that he ran with this group that would fight.
Violence was a part of their world.
He was-- he ran with a rough crowd.
Brown said Rose was murdered in the bathroom.
Police sprayed the area with luminol, a chemical which can reveal trace amounts of blood, even after it's been removed with water and detergent.
But they found nothing.
On a hallway carpet, the luminol revealed what appeared to be the imprint of a bloody bucket, but after two and a half years, there was not enough blood to perform DNA testing.
Investigators feared they were at a dead end, until they noticed a small spot on the wallpaper, just outside the bathroom.
It had the color consistent with blood, and it had kind of the configuration of what you would suspect if a blood droplet was falling down a wall.
The spot looked like part of the wallpaper pattern.
To see if it was blood, scientists performed a phenolphthalein test.
A wet q-tip was rubbed over the spot.
Then phenolphthalein and hydrogen peroxide were applied.
The q-tip turned pink, a positive, presumptive test for the presence of blood.
Of course, we didn't know whose blood it was.
Keep in mind, just because we find a drop of blood-- I mean, it could be the grandparents.
It could be anybody's blood that-- we didn't know for sure.
You know, in my mind I'm thinking, you know, could this be a blood drop of Rose Larner.
And at this point, you know, of course I got very excited and thought, you know, what if this could actually be from our victim?
I got very excited and thought, you know, what if this could actually be from our victim?
Scientists were able to extract enough blood from the wallpaper for DNA analysis but they had nothing to compare it to.
In Rose Larner's case file, police learned that she had been involved in a sexual assault four years earlier.
After the assault, a sample of her blood was taken and still existed in police custody.
The DNA profile from the blood on the wallpaper matched the DNA from Rose Larner's blood sample.
The odds of the blood belonging to anyone else were one and 747 million.
Identifying it as Rose Larner's is what's remarkable.
That tells us that Rose Larner was in that house at that time.
That collaborates what Bill Brown told us.
That was crucial.
Brown also revealed that they both rinsed rags soaked with Rose's blood in the basement sump pump.
Forensic scientists gathered all of the debris from the bottom of the drain.
They also excavated the fire pit near Bill Brown's parents' cabin, where Rose's body had allegedly been burned.
The search resembled an archaeological dig.
My job at that site was to excavate the fire pit and collect any remains, any evidence, in fire pit that might be relevant to the case.
Specifically, I was looking for evidence for human bone, human material.
The fragments were analyzed with an ultraviolet light in order to determine whether they were bone.
Under ultraviolet light, bone will glow.
The fragments that I did end up finding were very, very small.
Probably none of them were larger than the size of a pea.
So initially, when all the dirt and debris was in there, it was very difficult to tell what we had.
The bone chips were too damaged and degraded for DNA analysis, but they were analyzed to determine if they were human.
Magnified 100 times, human bone is circular in structure, while animal bone, seen here, is more linear.
The bones found in both sites were clearly human.
The number of circular structures in the bones, or osteons, increases with age.
There were relatively few osteons in the bone chips found in the debris.
We were able to determine that the remains were clearly human and, in some cases, they probably represented somebody who was a teenager or in their early '20s.
People just don't find bone fragments in their house.
And it collaborated with the bone fragments that we found in Northern Michigan, at the site where on Bill Brown's property where they took her and burned her remains.
The blood and the bone chips were exactly where Bill Brown said they'd be.
Police were now convinced that Rose Larner had been murdered.
According to Bill Brown's confession and the forensic evidence, prosecutors now knew what happened to Rose Larner on her last night alive.
Shortly after visiting her mother at the convenience store, Rose ran into her childhood friend, Bill Brown.
Hi Billy.
Let's go get John.
At Rose's suggestion, they picked up her ex-boyfriend, John Kehoe.
I'm gonna go inside and grab some stuff for the night's festivities.
John Kehoe bought some supplies for the evening, including a hatchet, a knife, and some lighter fluid.
Brown said he was not aware of the specific items Kehoe purchased until later that night.
Kehoe purchased until later that night.
Once at Kehoe's grandparents' home, all three took a shower together.
Kehoe again tried to initiate the sexual threesome, but Rose refused.
At the sink, without warning, Kehoe strangled her.
In the shower stall, Kehoe slit her throat and dismembered her body, using the knife and hatchet he purchased at the store.
Brown and Kehoe spent the next two days cleaning the blood, bone, and debris.
A bloody bucket left the stain on the carpet, found years later with the luminol.
Rags soaked with blood and bone were rinsed in the basement sump pump, where tiny pieces of bone were also discovered.
And a blood spot on the wall was identified as Rose Larner's through DNA testing.
Her body was burned in an outdoor fire pit.
After the cremation, the ashes were dumped out of the car window, as Kehoe and Brown drove back to Lansing.
I did say a prayer for her, right afterwards.
And I'm not a religious person.
But I did pray for her soul.
And uh-- and at that-- that night and many nights after, that's about all the thought I put into it.
All the other thought was in saving my-- saving my butt.
The bones in the sump pump, the luminol impression of the bloody bucket, the tiny speck of blood on the wallpaper, and the bone fragments in the fire pit, all confirmed Brown's story.
Before police could question John Kehoe, he fled the country.
After a six month international man hunt, Kehoe was finally located.
Kehoe was finally located.
If I'd saw him for the first time in Mexico-- he was drinking a beer in a bar.
Four minutes later he's sitting in US Custom's hands on the other side of the bridge.
It was like slam bam and he's out of there right now.
I don't think he knew what happened.
At the trial Kehoe had a ready defense.
He claimed that it was Bill Brown who had murdered Rose Larner.
John Kehoe was going to point the finger at him and say well, gee, I didn't do it.
I was just there.
And he killed my girlfriend.
He went nuts on coke and killed my girlfriend.
We knew that was coming.
But prosecutors argued that Bill Brown had no motive to kill Rose Larner.
John Kehoe did.
His motive was the problems that Rose Larner was causing for him in the days and weeks prior to her disappearance.
She was embarrassing him.
She smashed his truck.
It was typical for Rose not to be intimidated by this guy and to simply get into arguments with him and call him names, not back down.
That was Rose Larner.
And and this, I think, was something new for John Kehoe.
And it angered him.
It really angered him.
Although the crime occurred two and a half years earlier, Rose Larner was still able to speak to the jury, through the power of forensic science.
In this case, you know, I don't take the position that we didn't have a body.
I think we did.
We just had very small pieces of it.
So, I mean, they basically gave us a body.
The jury deliberated just over an hour.
We, the jury, find the defendant, John Ortiz Kehoe, guilty of first degree, premeditated murder.
Kehoe received Michigan's maximum sentence, life in prison without possibility of parole.
Rose Larner's grave is empty.
All that remains of her body are the tiny bone fragments, which are still in evidence.
I hope John Kehoe lives a long time in prison.
And I hope he thinks of Rose everyday that he's in person.
I feel a person like that would rather die than to be in prison the rest of his life.
So I feel that that's a just punishment.
But if he were to die, hope it's brutal.
Bill Brown was sentenced to one year in prison for helping cover up the murder.
He is now out on parole.
If I would have known what was going to take place, like I said, I wouldn't have been there.
She wouldn't have been there.
Never would have happened.
The way I feel about it is that by convicting John Kehoe, I had just saved other people's lives, other young girls' lives.
I had just saved other people's lives, other young girls' lives.
Because I just feel that it was his nature and that he enjoyed killing Rose Larner, and that he would do it again.
When Scott Dunn arrived at his friends party, he brought along a new acquaintance.
Someone his friends had never met before.
Scott was a ladies man.
And while it wasn't unusual for him to be seeing a number of women at the same time, his date on this night raised more than a few eyebrows. -How're you doing?
Cool, man. What's happening?
Hey everybody.
Whoah-ho-ho. -This is my lady friend Shaina.
Pretty cute, man.
Sometime during the party, Scott became ill.
So sick, he was unable to drive home.
A few days later we, Scott Dunn disappeared and was never seen again.
24 year old Scott Dunn was a fun loving young man who enjoyed life to the fullest.
Scott lived in Lubbock, Texas, settling there after serving in the US military.
He worked for MGM Electronics, in a job he loved, installing customs sound systems in automobiles.
The last time friends saw Scott was on May 13, 1991, at a party after work.
Scott was a prankster, and decided to add a little excitement to the festivities.
His date that night wasn't a she at all.
She was really a he.
A transvestite.
Before the night was through, Scott's friends eventually found out and weren't amused.
Later, while still at the party, Scott became ill.
He was so sick, he couldn't drive home, and stayed overnight on the sofa.
The next day, his live-in girlfriend, Leisha Hamilton drove over to pick him up. -He looked like crap.
He couldn't hardly walk-- um I mean, you could tell he been in bed all day.
He wasn't showered.
He wasn't clean.
Clothes on all awkwardly.
Couldn't get dressed by himself.
After spending another full day in bed, Scott told Leshia he finally felt well enough to return to work.
Scott told Leshia he finally felt well enough to return to work.
I woke up that morning.
He was in bed with me by then.
I asked him how he felt.
I asked him, did he need a ride to work because he didn't have his cars there.
He said, no, his friend was coming for him.
And just asked me to get him a glass of water and some sinus medicine. Which I did.
Brought it to him and then I left.
When I came home, he was gone.
When Scott's friend stopped by the apartment to pick him up, there was no answer.
No one there would answer, so-- um, just never heard from him.
Two days later, Leshia called Scott's father in Pennsylvania to see if he had heard from Scott.
And it's a young woman's voice, and-- uh, she goes into, I don't know if I'm talking to-- who I'm talking to-- but I assume you're Scott's father because I found the telephone number on the telephone bill.
I don't know if I'm talking to-- who I'm talking to-- but I assume you're Scott's father because I found the telephone number on the telephone bill.
And I said, well that's right, I'm am Scott's father.
But who are you?
She said, well I've been living with Scott for a couple of months now, and for some time-- we've been together for some time.
And I said, well I don't know-- really know who you are.
Jim Dunn filed a missing person's report with the Lubbock Police Department.
What was he wearing last when you saw him?
Police wondered whether Scott Dunn's personal life held some clues to his disappearance.
When Scott Dunn disappeared from Lubbock, Texas without a trace his friends told police, this was out the character.
The way Scott was-- he would've-- he would've called at least and said, hey guys, you know.
Look, I'm out here in Mexico. Hanging out.
Partying. You know, something.
Scott's live-in girlfriend, Leisha Hamilton, told police that when she returned from work, Scott was gone.
Scott was gone.
She also said that a large piece of carpet was missing from under the sofa.
When police searched the bedroom, they discovered that another piece of carpet in the bedroom had also been removed, and replaced with the carpet from under the sofa.
Along the edge was some rust colored stains The stain along the edge of that patch in the original carpet was very evident to anybody that has been doing this for any length of time.
The stain along the edge of that patch in the original carpet was very evident to anybody that has been doing this for any length of time.
It was blood. [music playing] When the carpet patch was lifted, police noticed it was held together with duct tape.
When the carpet patch was lifted, police noticed it was held together with duct tape.
On the underpadding was another large stain, which also appeared to be blood.
In one spot, it had soaked through a hole in the padding to the cement floor underneath.
And it looked as if someone had washed blood from the baseboard.
To find out, investigators used a chemical called luminol, which can detect areas where blood has been cleaned up with water and detergents.
The luminol revealed a scene of horrific violence.
You can actually see the pattern.
You can see where blood had been.
And my initial reaction was that something had occurred in that apartment.
It was stark.
Somebody had very obviously tried to clean the whole thing up, and had done a fairly good job of it.
I just knew that he was dead.
Felt very confidently that he was-- was dead.
That was probably the longest day of my life.
And it was most devastating thing that had ever happened to me.
But who would want to kill Scott Dunn?
Dunn had a previous arrest and conviction for possession of cocaine, but the theory that this was somehow drug-related was inconsistent with the crime scene.
If it was a drug hit, they probably would have left the person there.
Wanting everybody in the world to see, so that-- uh, nobody else would cross them.
And this-- this crime scene was covered up.
And the only reason it was covered up was because it was trying to be hidden.
Police also discovered Scott Dunn was leading a secret life.
Dunn was leading a secret life.
While living with Leisha Hamilton, he continued to date numerous other women.
He was wild.
He played the field.
He had-- um, in my opinion, he had a-- a history of using women.
Um, for his own purposes.
In fact, he was engaged to be married to a young lady in the Metroplex, while he was living with Leisha Hamilton.
Leisha Hamilton learned about Scott's engagement just one month earlier.
Who's calling?
His fiancee?
Yeah, I'll be sure to tell him you called.
And I think at the point where that telephone call came is where Leisha realized she had been had by Scott.
And-- uh, Leisha, herself was a user, and when it became apparent to her that she, in this situation was not the user, but was in fact the 'usee,' she became enraged.
But was that sufficient motive for Leisha Hamilton to murder Scott Dunn?
And if so, where was the body?
Leisha Hamilton continued to call Jim Dunn from Texas, keeping him informed of the investigation into Scott's disappearance.
But she asked for something in return.
She wanted Scott's yellow sports car.
Jim Dunn taped those telephone conversations.
You just seem to want the car, and I have promised you the car when this is all over.
But you don't seem to want to wait.
Actually, I don't.
I don't-- I don't need it.
It is a want right now, okay?
The only thing I want is this car.
That's the only thing I have wanted from the start.
That's the only thing I want now.
A background check by Lubbock Police revealed that Leisha Hamilton had a past arrest in New Mexico for embezzlement.
But if Leisha was involved in Scott's disappearance, why had she helped police by pointing out the missing carpet in their apartment?
Leisha told Scott's father that she thought a man named Tim Smith had something to do with Scott's disappearance.
Tim Smith had something to do with Scott's disappearance.
Tim Smith was a guy that lived in the apartment near Leisha.
He had been brought up in a very strict, very religious, environment.
My theory was that this was the first real contact he'd ever had with a worldly woman.
And that he became enamored with her.
And the way she made him feel.
And just fell-- fell head over heels in love with her.
Police discovered that Smith did not show up for work on the day Scott Dunn disappeared.
Tim Smith?
Lubbock Police Department.
When police visited Tim Smith's apartment to ask a few questions, they noticed he was packing to move.
We're investigating the disappearance of Scott Dunn.
Whatever I can do to help.
Sure, go ahead.
When they walked back into the living room, they noticed that something that had been sitting on the bookshelf disappeared.
Where's the roll of tape? -What tape?
What tape? -The duct tape.
It was there, on the shelf.
I don't know what you're talking about.
But behind some books on another shelf, police found what they were looking for.
The duct tape that was on the shelf just a few minutes earlier.
That was a stroke of luck, but it's also good investigative work.
I mean, how many times would you walk into a place where guys are moving and see a roll of duct tape and think nothing of it?
The duct tape was sent to the forensic laboratory for analysis.
The tape in Smith's apartment looked very similar to the tape on the carpet patch in Dunn's apartment.
The samples were analyzed using infra spectrophotometry, where infrared light is passed through the duct tape.
And the detector will determine how much wavelength of light is being absorbed at different wavelengths.
The results are then printed out in a chart.
In the case of Roger Scott Dunn, the duct tape, we separated out into it's components.
The fibers that run along in the duct tape, the backing of the duct tape, and the adhesive of the duct tape.
As you can see, the infrared spectrum, from the roll of duct tape found that the suspect's house, and the duct tape found at the scene are consistent in the fiber component, the backing component, and the adhesive component.
And the role of tape held even more clues.
On the side of the roll were green nylon fibers trilobal, or triangular in shape.
They were the same size and shape, and made of the same polymers, and dyed the same color as the carpet in Scott Dunn's bedroom.
I feel confident that the fibers on the side of the duct tape came from the apartment.
And that the duct tape underneath the carpet came from the roll of duct tape.
But without a body, authorities were hesitant to conclude homicide.
A lot of it had to do with the body.
Um, we had no body.
And, uh-- the District Attorney's office at that time was very apprehensive to try to take something to trial, where you had no-- no, uh-- corpus delicti, as what they say.
A full year passed.
And Jim Dunn decided to take matters into his own hands.
He heard about a group of international forensic experts, who meet several times a year in Philadelphia to study unsolved murders.
The group of 82 members is called the VIDOCQ society, named after Eugene Francois Vidocq, an 18th century French detective, considered to be the father of modern criminal investigation.
French detective, considered to be the father of modern criminal investigation.
One of the co-founders of the VIDOCQ society, Richard Walter, agreed to listen to Mr. Dunn's story.
I had, he looked me straight in the eye and said, uh-- Jim, aren't you tired of being the grieving father?
And he looked at me and he said, I thought I was supposed to be.
I thought I was supposed to be.
And I said no, you are supposed to be goddamn mad.
Let's go after that bitch.
Richard Walter was convinced that Leisha Hamilton held the key to Scott Dunn's disappearance.
Walter sent the crime scene photos to Dr. Richard Shepherd, a forensic pathologist at Scotland Yard in London.
After reviewing the information, Dr. Shepherd concluded that Scott Dunn had been murdered in the corner of his bedroom.
The result of multiple blunt trauma injuries.
But at the time, under Texas law, without a body, there was no homicide.
Armed with Dr. Shepherd's forensic analysis, Richard Walker pleaded the case to the District Attorney, arguing that they had a body part.
Richard Walker pleaded the case to the District Attorney, arguing that they had a body part.
He said, what part of the body is that?
I said, blood is a connective tissue.
He said-- he looked-- he gave me a long look and he said, all right, you got a murder.
Prosecutors brought in their own blood spatter expert, Tom Bevel to confirm the findings of Dr. Shepherd.
Tom Bevel to confirm the findings of Dr. Shepherd.
According to Bevel, the blood spatter pattern on the walls indicated three distinct lines of cast-off blood from a weapon.
For example, if we had three cast-off stains that were going in three directions, that would be, uh-- consistent with three blows.
Plus the one to create the blood in the first place.
So in this case, we would say there was a minimum or four blows that was delivered.
To find out how much blood Scott Dunn lost during the assault, Bevel conducted a blood saturation test.
By pouring human blood onto a test piece of carpet, Bevel created the same size stain found in the bedroom.
Bevel created the same size stain found in the bedroom.
In this case, 266 square inches.
It took just under two units of blood to create the stain, and soak through to the padding underneath.
If you take that into consideration with all the other physical evidence there, such as the blood clean up, cutting out of carpet, the blood spatter, the cast-off, this to the wall and also to the ceiling.
Uh, along with that blood volume, uh, it certainly is a high suspicion that uh, somebody in fact is dead.
Authorities were now convinced that Scott Dunn had been murdered in his bedroom.
Lubbock police suspected that both Leisha Hamilton and Tim Smith were somehow involved in Scott Dunn's murder.
Smith were somehow involved in Scott Dunn's murder.
But they had no evidence linking Leisha to the crime, and the only link to Smith was the duct tape.
Until Richard Walter discovered something that was previously overlooked.
Walter learned that several strands of unidentified hair had been found on the duct tape in Scott Dunn's bedroom.
He suggested the hair be sent for forensic analysis.
At the FBI lab in Washington DC, the hair from the duct tape underneath the carpet was compared to hair samples from Leisha Hamilton and Tim Smith.
No Scott Dunn hairs were found on that tape, but both the hairs of Leisha Hamilton and Tim Smith were found on that duct tape holding it in.
Which means that when that duct tape was put down and that patch put in place, they were there.
Five and a half years after Scott Dunn's disappearance, Leisha Hamilton and Tim Smith well arrested and charged with murder.
Prosecutors believe that Leisha's motive was revenge.
That she was angry when she learned that Scott was engaged to another woman.
She's as hard as rocks.
Aggressive.
Uh, worked smart.
Um, but has this insatiable appetite for power, control, crushing people.
She dismisses you.
You don't dismiss her.
Leisha Hamilton was the absolute instigator, ringleader and she was the Wicked Witch of the West, who contrived, developed, led and covered up this whole thing.
Prosecutors believed that Scott Dunn was murdered in the early morning hours of May 16, 1991.
He was asleep in the bedroom.
And struck at least four times with blunt object.
About two units Scott's blood was lost in the attack.
As Scott's body was removed from the apartment, his blood was transferred onto the bedroom doorknob.
The location of the body is still unknown.
The cover-up failed because the water and detergents could not remove the hemoglobin components of the blood, which later fluoresced when sprayed with the chemical luminol.
A piece of carpet from under the sofa in the living room was used to patch the blood stained carpet in the bedroom.
The duct tape used to patch the carpet together contained strands of hair consistent with hair samples from both Leisha Hamilton and Tim Smith.
And the side of the duct tape picked up some stray carpet fibers.
The roll was later found in Tim Smith's apartment.
Leisha Hamilton and Tim Smith were tried separately, and both were convicted of murder.
Leisha Hamilton was sentenced to 20 years.
Tim Smith received a 10 year probation.
The jury, I think, believed that perhaps he had a great deal to do with disposing of the body.
But they didn't believe he was actually there when the murder took place.
And I think for that reason they recommended the judge impose probation instead of sentencing him to a term in the penitentiary, which would be carried out.
Although the body of Scott Dunn has never been found, a headstone waits.
And a father still mourns.
I'm just hopeful that at some point, uh, somebody will talk, and that we can recover his remains, and still he can have a decent burial and a, a decent, uh, ceremony that we could put him to rest.
And I'd feel totally absolved at that point that I've done everything that I could do.
If I could ever reach that point.
I haven't quite reach that yet and, uh, I still-- crosses my mind what else I can do, but at this point I'm going to let it go, and hope that somebody who-- the good Lord or somebody, will give us some direction.
I'm going to let it go, and hope that somebody who-- the good Lord or somebody, will give us some direction.
And I'll know what that actually means in my life at some point.
In 1987, a mother and her two young daughters were brutally murdered in their apartment in Anchorage, Alaska.
Microscopic clues from inside the apartment identified a family relative as a possible suspect.
But how could investigators tell whether the evidence was fresh or had been there since long before the murders?
Anchorage, Alaska, is considered one of the most scenic cities in the United States.
Bordered by the Alaska mountain range on one side and the Pacific Ocean on the other, it draws tens of thousands of tourists each year.
The life blood of the state had been the oil business.
But in the mid 1980s, prices for crude oil crashed, forcing thousands of workers off the job.
John Newman was one of the oil workers who lost his job.
When he couldn't find other work in Alaska, he left for California to take classes to become a locksmith.
His wife Nancy stayed behind to care for their two young daughters eight-year-old Melissa and three-year-old Angie.
Angie was a cherub, beautiful blonde hair.
Just cute, charming, very charming.
Melissa was at that stage where she wasn't baby-cute anymore, but she had all the potential to be beautiful.
Nancy worked as a waitress at Gwennie's restaurant, an Anchorage landmark.
She was known for never missing a day.
And when she didn't come to work one Sunday morning, her co-workers were concerned.
Nancy's sister Cheryl worked for us as a hostess.
And they were very, very close.
And I said, Cheryl, you know, you've got your car.
Can you run over and check on Nancy, see what's going on?
Cheryl immediately drove over to her sister's apartment.
Nancy Newman's front door was locked, but inside was a scene of horrific violence.
Nancy was found in her bedroom.
She had been sexually assaulted and strangled to death with a pillowcase.
Eight-year-old Melissa had met the same fate.
Three-year-old Angie had bled to death after her throat was slashed.
We'd never had a crime like that in town before, you know, a whole family basically killed in, in their own house.
That was very heinous and definitely out of the ordinary for Anchorage.
The coroner underestimated the murders took place some time on Saturday morning.
None of the neighbors saw or heard anything unusual during that time.
Although there were no signs of forced entry, Nancy Newman's camera and purse were missing from the apartment.
Nancy Newman's camera and purse were missing from the apartment.
A knife was also missing from a butcher block in the kitchen.
A cookie tin that normally held Nancy's waitressing tips was empty on the kitchen table.
A damp wash rag was found in the bathroom sink.
He was in a comfort zone inside that apartment.
He knew this situation of these victims enough to know that he wouldn't in all likelihood be interrupted, that he could spend a significant amount of time.
And we could tell he spent a significant amount of time.
He had three different victims, three different bedrooms, two of them sexually assaulted.
And then we had the person completely cleaning up.
He was-- had to be covered in blood.
John Newman was attending school in California.
Police could find no evidence that he had returned to Alaska at the time of the murders, and was not considered a suspect.
But the killings reflected a great rage on the part of the perpetrator.
Police wondered if Nancy Newman had made an enemy among co-workers or customers of the restaurant.
It was a difficult station that she worked.
It was normally, you know, single guys.
And maybe they were hung over.
Maybe they were just being jerks.
As John Newman returned home to bury his wife and two small children, investigators wondered whether this was a botched robbery attempt that had turned violent or an act of revenge.
After the murders of Nancy Newman and her two daughters Melissa and Angie, Anchorage residents feared that a random sex killer was on the loose.
Anchorage residents feared that a random sex killer was on the loose.
Why didn't somebody hear Nancy's screams?
I used to have dreams at night.
I could hear a woman screaming.
And it would be, you know, when you first fall asleep, and I'd wake up and I'd still hear the screams.
But I didn't know what to do.
I couldn't do anything.
And for a while I didn't know if it was dreams or if it was really happening.
Who in this community would commit such a crime where they would actually kill two young children like that?
And if, if it wasn't the husband, then who?
And was he still out there on the streets?
And that had a lot of people who were genuinely scared.
The lack of forced entry and the time spent in the apartment led investigators to believe the killer had been there before.
Yeah, this is the worst case that I've worked.
I've had, I've been involved in one form or another in over 200 homicide investigations.
And this would be the worst as far as the victims go, the brutality, the age, what was done to them.
At the crime scene, investigators searched for fingerprints using a technique called superglue fuming.
When superglue is heated, the fumes attach to the biological material in finger oils.
Then powder is used to reveal the print.
Sometimes you'll be able to see them, sometimes you will not.
After the superglue fuming process is completed.
As a fingerprint examiner, once those fingerprints are fixed, we either photograph them as they develop or add different chemicals to that item to try to make the fingerprints visible, so that we can preserve them and compare them to suspects or other individuals.
Kathy Monfreda found over 100 fingerprints in the apartment, many did not belong to anyone in the immediate family.
These prints were found on the inside of the front door, on the cookie tin, where Nancy Newman kept her waitressing tips, in the bathroom, and in other areas.
Investigators identified the prints as those of Kirby Anthony, a nephew of the Newman family.
Anthony was a 23-year-old drifter who had recently moved to Anchorage from Idaho.
Since he needed a place to stay, the Newmans allowed him to move in temporarily.
Kirby had lived there with them.
They had let him stay there.
That he was a relative, they felt sorry for him.
They knew he had a troubled past.
And so he had a legitimate reason for being in there, which means a lot to what we're going to discover in trace evidence.
They put him up. He stayed with them.
And I think they got along OK, although, we did hear later and learn that he didn't get along real well with Melissa, the eight-year-old.
Kirby Anthony admitted that living in a small apartment with two young children was difficult.
And he told police he moved out amicably, just two weeks before the murders.
Furthermore, Kirby Anthony denied any knowledge of the attack and said he had an alibi.
He told police he was out with friends on Friday night and spent Saturday morning eating breakfast at a Burger King restaurant.
In addition to the fingerprints, investigators found large amounts of hair in almost every room of the Newman's apartment.
The hairs were Caucasian and were not similar to anyone in the Newman family.
Anchorage police sent the hairs to the FBI in Washington, DC, hoping that they could shed some light on the identity of the killer.
At FBI Headquarters in Washington, DC, analyst Doug Deedrick examined all of the hairs and fibers collected from the Newman's apartment.
There were thousands of hairs and fibers throughout the apartment, which is not unusual.
But Deedrick found large numbers of hairs in the victims' bedrooms, which were pubic.
It is very easy to distinguish the differences between the head hair and the pubic hair, differences being in diameter, length, color, internal microscopic characteristics, the appearance of the tip.
Pubic hairs generally have a pointed tip, whereas head hairs are often cut.
His first task was to compare the hairs to the victims and to their prime suspect, Kirby Anthony.
In Deedrick's opinion, the pubic hairs were microscopically similar to hair samples collected from Kirby Anthony.
But Anthony's hairs in the apartment could be explained, since he had been living there until 10 days before the murders.
The question was when were these hairs left in the apartment?
To find out, Doug Deedrick devised a unique experiment.
I had to take a vacuum home.
I had to vacuum the house.
And I don't believe the house has ever been any cleaner.
But every, every night for two weeks I vacuumed and, and, then, compared afterwards to see what types of hairs I found and how many hairs I found.
I vacuumed and, and, then, compared afterwards to see what types of hairs I found and how many hairs I found.
Deedrick discovered that pubic hairs can travel, or migrate, from room to room.
And the way that happens in a household is through what is called "a secondary transfer."
Pubic hairs travel from room to room, primarily on socks.
The Deedrick experiment revealed that these transfers were limited.
Very few pubic hairs from an adult's bedroom migrate into a child's bedroom.
How then to account for the large number of Kirby Anthony's pubic hairs in the children's rooms?
One explanation was that Anthony was in the girl's bedroom nude or uncovered.
In addition, all of the pubic hairs found in these rooms were clean and moist.
If the hairs had been there since the time Anthony was living there, the shafts would have been dry and collected dirt.
When a hair is deposited, especially on the floor, in the carpet of a residence, over time the hair can exhibit chew marks from beetle larva that tend to eat on the hairs.
The hairs will accumulate dirt or debris on the surface.
The hairs that were found on the body of Melissa and on Angie, all three of those hairs, pubic hairs, like Kirby Anthony's did not have any dirt on them.
And they had, actually, what looked like fresh blood on the surface of the hairs.
And that, I thought, was very significant.
Next, Deedrick examined the damp wash rag found in the Newman's sink after the murders.
On the wash rag were some green wool fibers which matched the pair of gloves found in Nancy Newman's bedroom.
Also on the wash rag were traces of the victims' blood.
Finally, Deedrick made a startling discovery.
On the wash rag were pubic hairs with partial egg casings from pubic lice-- an extremely rare finding.
The hairs were microscopically similar to Kirby Anthony.
And investigators discovered that Anthony had recently been treated for pubic lice.
And there was more evidence linking Kirby Anthony to the Newman crime scene.
Kirby Anthony to the Newman crime scene.
One was the location of Kirby Anthony's palm print in a particularly unusual location.
Above Melissa's bed on the wall, an entire left hand print was developed.
Melissa had been sexually assaulted.
The print, only 10 inches above her head, was telling.
Anthony's fingerprints were also found on the container that Nancy Newman used to hold the cash tips from the restaurant.
Kirby Anthony's roommate told police that on the morning of the murders Anthony had walked into their apartment with blood on his clothing and immediately washed everything he was wearing.
Anthony had walked into their apartment with blood on his clothing and immediately washed everything he was wearing.
The roommate also revealed that Anthony was counting a large amount of change later that same day.
Police were still missing two important pieces of evidence-- the murder weapon and a motive.
As the investigation into the murders of Nancy Newman and her two daughters continued, more and more evidence pointed to the Newmans' nephew Kirby Anthony.
When the Anchorage police searched for a motive, they learned that Kirby Anthony's departure from the Newman apartment was not as amicable as he first admitted.
John, Kirby is making me very uncomfortable.
Now he's-- John Newman told police that his wife had called him in California.
John Newman told police that his wife had called him in California.
She said Anthony was behaving inappropriately, and, on at least one occasion, had struck the children.
Kirby was acting inappropriate.
He was starting to physically discipline the girls, get angry at them.
Um, it was very uncomfortable for Nancy and the girls.
And Nancy had relayed this information to John.
And John had told Nancy to tell him to leave, get him out of the apartment.
Police believe that it was an angry Kirby Anthony who moved into this dilapidated apartment just 10 days before the murders.
Investigators had one last piece of physical evidence to examine-- the vacuum cleaner Nancy Newman used to clean her apartment.
Newman used to clean her apartment.
A neighbor told police Nancy Newman vacuumed her apartment shortly before the murders.
I wouldn't call her exactly a clean freak, not obsessively a clean freak, but for somebody with two little kids-- and I had two little kids-- it was a very neat, well-ordered place.
When Doug Deedrick looked inside the vacuum cleaner bag, he saw many separate layers of dirt, each layer was different.
The top layer was the most recent layer of dirt.
In it, Deedrick could find only one pubic hair from Kirby Anthony.
The absence of Kirby Anthony's pubic hairs in the top layer of dirt in the vacuum bag along with the presence of a great deal of his pubic hair at the murder scene indicated that Kirby Anthony had been inside the apartment between the time it was last vacuumed and the time of the murders.
If I saw Kirby today, I'd shoot him, run over him with a car.
Just whatever.
And you know that that would ruin my life.
This man has scarred so many people.
What he did to Nancy and the girls was unthinkable.
Prosecutors believe that the microscopic trail of evidence Kirby Anthony left behind clearly shows his path on the morning of the murders.
The theory was that Anthony was angry after he was forced to vacate the Newmans' apartment and sought revenge.
The night before the murders, friends said Kirby was using cocaine and alcohol.
Mom, this meal stinks.
That's enough, girls.
The next morning, Anthony entered the Newmans' apartment.
The children were sent to their rooms.
John and I asked you to leave.
You shouldn't even be here.
You're not welcome.
At some point, Anthony grabbed the kitchen knife and forced Nancy Newman into her bedroom.
Wearing wool gloves he found in the bedroom, he raped and strangled Nancy Newman with a pillowcase.
Then, he entered Melissa's bedroom, assaulting and killing her too, leaving his palm print above her bed.
The evidence suggests Anthony cleaned himself in the bathroom, leaving the damp washcloth complete with his pubic hair lice, the green wool fibers, and the victims' blood in the sink.
He then killed three-year-old Angie, the only remaining person who could place him at the scene.
Anthony left his fingerprints on the cookie tin as it took Nancy's tips.
He also took Nancy's purse, camera, and the knife he used in the murders.
The purse and the knife were never recovered.
The camera was later found in his possession.
It was a crime of opportunity.
Kirby was a very disorganized killer.
He just walked over there for whatever reason, became out of control, and continued down this path of destruction.
At the trial, Kirby Anthony pleaded not guilty and acted as his own lawyer.
His defense was that he was framed by police, but he had no explanation for the washcloth and the wealth of evidence it contained.
The courtroom was packed pretty much every day.
While they were waiting for the judge to come into the chambers, Kirby Anthony turned and looked over at John Newman who was in the gallery there, and he said, "You're a fool, John."
And I can remember our cameras capturing John's reaction.
He was crying. He was in tears.
He was so angry.
I would say the stupidest thing that Kirby Anthony did was to have himself declared co-counsel and try and represent himself.
And the other stupidest thing is actually get on the witness stand.
I'd say the other stupidest thing he did was he turned around to John Newman in court that was filled with people and called him a fool.
After two hours of deliberation, Kirby Anthony was found guilty and sentenced to 357 years in prison.
Kirby Anthony was found guilty and sentenced to 357 years in prison.
Detective Mike Grimes has difficulty forgetting the unspeakable violence that took the lives of a loving mother and her two young children.
We can scenario this and try and figure out why people do things, you never can get inside their head.
There was a sexual motivation there.
I have theories that the reason he was asked to move out, I think, something happened between him and one of the little girls.
I think, something happened between him and one of the little girls.
I think he was very resentful of it.
Kirby was a drug abuser, you know, particularly cocaine.
And I think knowing his psychopathic personality fueled by cocaine, I think, he went over there in a rage.
Nancy Newman's camera, the one found in Kirby Anthony's possession after the murders, contained family photos taken during happier times, pictures of the lives destroyed by a senseless act of revenge.
In 1982, an 11-year-old girl was abducted in broad daylight from this softball field in Marshallville, Ohio.
When her badly decomposed body was found one week later, investigators hoped that the orange triangular-shaped fibers found at the scene would lead them to the killer.
Marshallville, Ohio, is a small agricultural community with a population of just under 750.
It's the kind of place where everybody knows everybody else, where people care about each other.
Krista Lea Harrison was a carefree 11-year-old girl growing up in a place most residents thought was exempt from big-city crime.
Krista Harrison was always around the town.
When we were at the ballpark playing softball, her brother and I on the local softball team, Krista was always near the home plate area there when we were coming in off the field.
Krista was always near the home plate area there when we were coming in off the field.
Always joking around with us.
On July 17, 1982, Krista and a friend, a boy who lived nearby, were collecting aluminum cans at the softball field, which was directly across the street from Krista's home.
When the boy went to get a drink, a van drove up and stopped next to Krista.
The boy told authorities the man forced Krista into his van and took off.
I'd been on the force for 10 years at the time this happened, and I had never seen anything like this.
We never-- I can't even tell you the last time we experienced anything-- an abduction like this of a young child.
So it was very emotional for all of us.
Within hours, police set up road blocks and issued an All Points Bulletin for the van, which was described as dark red or brown with bubble-shaped rear side windows.
Krista's friend described the abductor as a white male age 25 to 35 with dark curly hair and a mustache.
25 to 35 with dark curly hair and a mustache.
Volunteers searched the entire area immediately following the abduction on the ground, in the air, and also in the local waterways.
All without success.
We were anticipating maybe a ransom telephone call to the parents, so we had made arrangements to record phone calls.
We had set up separate phone lines for them to use so they wouldn't have to tie up their telephone, hopefully, waiting to get this ransom call, which never came.
Six days later in a deserted field just outside of town, hunters found the badly decomposed remains of a young girl.
The body was partially wrapped in a clear plastic bag.
Near the body, investigators found a pair of men's blue jeans, a plaid shirt, and a pair of black leather gloves.
A few miles away, searchers found a clump of human hair, a beach towel, and a cardboard box covered with blood.
Forensic tests confirmed that the body was that of Krista Harrison.
Mr. Harrison-- Gerald was there a little after I had arrived.
And we told Gerald, you know-- I could not identify her.
She was just so decomposed and I told Gerald, I said just remember Krista the way she was.
I said just remember Krista the way she was.
The autopsy revealed Krista had died of strangulation.
She had also been sexually assaulted.
In Krista's hair, clothing, and on the beach towel found near the body, forensic scientists noticed some unusual orange fibers.
I saw fibers-- several fibers that really stood out.
They were an ugly orange fiber.
Forensic scientist Jeffrey Lynn had seen these same orange fibers before, just eight months earlier.
Similar fibers were found on the body of 12-year-old Tina Harmon, who had been raped and murdered in a nearby town.
Harmon, who had been raped and murdered in a nearby town.
It was amazing to me that I saw the same fibers on Krista Harrison that I had seen on Tina Harmon.
Harrison that I had seen on Tina Harmon.
Tina Harmon's were so unusual and there were so many of them, we really thought they were important.
I really thought those were important at that time.
But when I saw them on Krista Harrison, then I knew we had something very important.
But there was a problem.
The man convicted of Harmon's murder, Herman Ray Rucker, was in police custody at the time of Krista Harrison's murder.
Rucker was serving a life sentence for that crime.
The evidence against Rucker had been largely circumstantial, since investigators had not been able to link Rucker to the distinctive orange fibers.
Investigators now wondered whether the wrong man had been convicted of Tina Harmon's murder.
If so, a serial murderer was on the loose in the farmlands of Ohio.
When Krista Harrison's body was discovered in a field 30 miles from her home in Marshallville, Ohio, investigators had only two clues to the perpetrator's identity.
30 miles from her home in Marshallville, Ohio, investigators had only two clues to the perpetrator's identity.
First, a witness said the abductor was driving a brown van with bubble-shaped side rear windows.
Second, there were a number of unusual orange fibers in Krista Harrison's hair and on the beach towel found near her body.
In the forensics lab, scientists discovered that the fibers were man-made, specifically polyester.
Under the microscope, the fibers were triangular in shape, or trilobal.
The fact that it was polyester and trilobal indicated to me, even back before we had a suspect, that it was likely a carpet fiber.
Forensic scientist Jeffrey Lynn was concerned since he found the same orange fibers on another victim, 12-year-old Tina Harmon, who was raped and murdered eight months earlier.
12-year-old Tina Harmon, who was raped and murdered eight months earlier.
The migrant farm worker, Herman Ray Rucker, had already been convicted of Tina Harmon's murder and was serving a life sentence in prison.
They were too unusual to be seen on the bodies of two girls, both abducted, both sexually assaulted, both murdered in Wayne County.
Investigators realized that the possibility of Krista Harrison and Tina Harmon both coming into contact with orange trilobal carpet fibers at the hands of two different killers was extremely unlikely.
Some quick tests between the two fibers showed that they compared and that they were the same.
Now people were very nervous because we had, in the minds of the community, two girls taken from our village streets and it appeared to be the same person.
Investigators turned their attention to the clear plastic bag found wrapped around Krista Harrison's ankles.
It was unusual because of its thickness and the unique way the bag had been folded in the manufacturing process.
FBI Special Agent Bill Callis needed to find the origin of that plastic bag.
He traced it to a manufacturer in Pioneer, Ohio.
The bag found with Krista Harrison was the same thickness, size, and shape, and had the same fold patterns as those manufactured for a line of black leather custom seats for use in vans.
The seats were sold exclusively through a specialty mail order catalog for Sears Roebuck and Company.
The cardboard box used to transport Krista Harrison's body was unusual since it was L-shaped, and was positively identified as the shipping container for these same black leather van seats.
The next step was to search Sears' records to identify all Ohio residents who had purchased these black leather seats in the months preceding Krista's abduction.
The next order of business was, of course, to go to those people and interview them to determine whether or not they might be a potential suspect in our case.
There were only 23 people in northern Ohio who ordered these leather van seats.
But none owned a red, maroon, or brown van with teardrop-shaped bubble windows on the back side panel that were clearly described by the witness.
The killer with the orange carpet was still on the loose.
This guy is obviously out there.
We haven't got him yet.
He's done this before and he's certainly likely to do it again.
So there was a real urgency to finding this individual.
The town of Marshallville, Ohio, mourned the death of Krista Lea Harrison, and life went on.
Although no one felt the same sense of security they once did.
Weeks passed, then months.
Then the one year anniversary of Krista's murder, still wit no arrest.
To the disappointment of investigators working the case, it appeared that the trail of the bright orange fibers had turned cold.
People became very aware of the safety of their children.
They locked the doors at night.
The kids weren't out of eyesight of a trusted neighbor, the parents, et cetera.
People did watch their kids a lot closer.
The park became a ghost town.
Children didn't play out there for awhile.
And it was a tremendous apprehension that this could happen again.
Investigators wondered whether Krista Harrison's killer would strike again.
Harrison's killer would strike again.
And if so, where?
Krista Harrison's killer left behind a trail of physical evidence.
Investigators knew he ordered black leather van seats from a Sears mail order catalog because the plastic covering and carton from that purchase were found with Krista Harrison's body.
They also knew that the killer had orange trilobal-shaped carpet in his van or home.
All they needed now was a suspect.
The fibers were something that were left behind by the criminal, but we didn't have the second part of the equation.
We needed to match those fibers with fibers in the possession of a suspect or a criminal.
It took police an entire year before they finally got the break they needed, and they got it from a most unlikely source.
50 miles from where Krista Harrison was abducted, the manager of a local gas station, a woman we'll call Debbie, was doing some maintenance work outside when she was abducted at gunpoint.
Don't move.
You're coming with me.
She was driven to an unknown location.
And over the next several hours, her head was shaved.
She was beaten, assaulted, and tortured with electricity.
It was sadistic, inhuman.
And no one should be out on the street after they have done what they did to me.
And I was 28 at the time.
The man tortured her by taking a lamp cord and cutting the wire and plugging it in, and then using the two electric leads.
I was tortured repeatedly.
It was the blood that was everywhere.
It was on the ceiling.
But it was in a hallway, you know, on a bench is how I was tortured with four limbs tied.
The next morning, Debbie's attacker left her handcuffed and chained to the bed.
If you try to escape, I'll kill you.
I'm going out.
I won't be long.
After 12 hours of captivity, still bleeding from her wounds, Debbie's enormous will to survive took over.
Debbie's enormous will to survive took over.
You know, I even thought at one point I'd have to eat my thumbs if I could.
I'd have to eat my thumbs if I could.
I mean, I was so desperate to get out because I knew he was going to kill me.
Eventually, Debbie freed one of her hands from the ropes and then was able to free her ankles.
This left the excruciatingly painful process of attempting to pull her remaining hand through the metal frame of the handcuff.
Miraculously, she succeeded.
She grabbed a bathrobe and fled.
Once outside, Debbie had no idea where she was.
So she turned to the only place she could think of for help.
And I looked up to God, and I said, God, I need a sign.
I need help.
I don't know where I'm at.
And a poodle barked so I went to the house.
And she was a wonderful, wonderful lady, Mrs. Smith.
Mrs. Smith immediately phoned the police.
She was so badly bruised it looked like deep purple underwear that she was wearing.
It was God's will.
I'm a miracle as far as escaping.
It was a miracle.
Debbie identified the man who had kidnapped her as Robert Anthony Buell.
Buell worked for the city of Akron, Ohio, in the planning department, was college educated, dating a local attorney, and was a respected member of the community.
Faced with the evidence against him, Buell pleaded no contest to the charge of kidnapping and rape.
Buell pleaded no contest to the charge of kidnapping and rape.
But police couldn't help but notice that Buell was driving a brown van, similar to the one seen at Krista Harrison's abduction.
Although it did not have the same bubble-shaped windows in the back the witness clearly described, Buell's van did have an orange carpet in the back.
Buell's van did have an orange carpet in the back.
Robert Buell denied he was involved in Krista Harrison's abduction.
Buell's attorney pointed out that even if the carpet in the back of Buell's van was similar to the carpet fibers found on Krista Harrison, they were not unique since many other Ohio residents had similar carpet in their home, office, or automobiles.
And even though this polyester trilobal ugly orange color was pretty unique, certainly there are millions of other fibers like it in the world.
This is not like a fingerprint comparison.
This is not like a DNA comparison.
This is not a definitive match.
What else would prosecutors find out about these unusual orange fibers?
Would there be another link to sew up the case?
A year after the murder of 11-year-old Krista Harrison, police finally had a suspect in 43-year-old Robert Buell, an employee of the city of Akron, Ohio.
He had been arrested for the kidnapping and rape of a gas station manager, who escaped after 12 grueling hours of torture.
And in a surprise discovery in the back of Buell's van, investigators found orange polyester trilobal carpet similar to the fibers found on Krista Harrison's body.
We now had the second part of the equation.
We had the fibers from Krista's hair, we had the fibers from Krista's clothing, we had the fibers from the Budweiser blanket.
And we now had something to compare it to.
The fibers from the van.
To see how rare or common this carpet was, investigators tracked the manufacturer of the carpet to the JP Stevens Company in Canton, Ohio.
Factory records indicated that this particular carpet was not a big seller because of it's color.
They had only ever manufactured 12,000 square yards of this carpeting.
Their records also showed that of that 12,000 square yards, only 74 square yards was ever shipped to northern Ohio.
Further investigation revealed that Robert Buell had purchased two black leather van seats from Sears and Roebuck on June 30, just three weeks before Krista's murder.
The plastic bag which covered those seats, along with the cardboard shipping box, were both found with Krista Harrison's body.
Robert Buell also owned a van similar to the one at Krista Harrison's abduction.
It was similar but not identical, since Buell's van did not have to teardrop-shaped bubble windows the witness described.
However, neighbors told police that Buell had removed the bubble-shaped side windows and installed sliding rectangular ones shortly after Krista Harrison's murder.
Inside Robert Buell's home was even more evidence linking him to Krista Harrison's murder.
Police discovered Robert Buell owned a pair of jeans identical in size, make, and with the same wear patterns as the discarded jeans found near Krista Harrison's body.
Tiny specks of beige and blue paint also found on the discarded jeans matched the beige and blue paint samples on the walls of Robert Buell's home.
Black spray paint from Buell's garage was found on the cardboard box found near Krista's body.
Prosecutors believe that Buell took Krista Harrison to his home immediately following the abduction.
The orange carpet fibers from the van were later found in Krista Harrison's hair.
After the murder, Buell placed Krista's body in the plastic bag from one of his new van seats, then placed the body inside the cardboard shipping box that held those seats.
Buell dumped the body 30 miles outside of town in a field.
A little further away, Buell discarded the jeans and shirt he had been wearing.
Tests on the bones indicated the body had been in extremely high temperatures for quite some time, an indication the body was in the vehicle for days before it was dumped in the field.
Robert Buell never realized that the unusual orange carpet fibers from his van, along with the ability to track the plastic bag and the cardboard box, would be his undoing.
On April 4, 1984, a jury found Robert Anthony Buell guilty of the kidnapping, sexual assault, and murder of 11-year-old Krista Lea Harrison and sentenced him to death in the electric chair.
Herman Ray Rucker, the man convicted of Tina Harmon's murder, won a new trial since the same orange tribal carpet fibers were discovered at that crime scene.
Rucker was later acquitted.
Prosecutors believe that Robert Buell may have been involved in Tina Harmon's murder.
Robert Buell denies this, and no charges have been filed.
Investigators agree that if it hadn't been for Debbie's courage, perseverance, and will to survive, Robert Buell might never have been apprehended.
Robert Buell might never have been apprehended.
I have to believe that Krista is watching, watching us-- all of us.
And maybe she was the angel that helped me, you know?
God could have gave her wings and she could have helped me escape too.
You know?
And I'm sure she knows, you know, where Buell is.
So, you know, he can't hurt another person, another child ever.
I knew that when I first saw the fibers on the victim, they had a potential to be very important.
And they turned out to be a very definitive link between this individual and Krista Harrison.
This case was built on scientific evidence, and the fiber evidence was the scientific evidence that allowed the jury to find Buell guilty of killing Krista Harrison and impose the death penalty for that crime.
Harrison and impose the death penalty for that crime.
MAN:--identify this man?
A prostitute told police that some local drug dealers may have killed someone in her basement.
But police could find no evidence of violence in the home.
The only clue investigators found was a piece of used chewing gum.
Scientists wondered whether it would help solve the mystery.
Easton, Pennsylvania is the first city you come to when driving from New York City on the new interstate highway, Route 78.
City on the new interstate highway, Route 78.
By day, Easton proudly displays its picturesque downtown and colonial era architecture.
But by night, drug dealers stroll the streets, since they can make more money than in New York City.
They can do better here.
Less competition.
Maybe not as a violent scene as in New York or New Jersey.
And so, it's been a magnet and easy access.
And with the drug traffic has come an increase in violence.
On August 5, 1996, a prostitute Kathy Sagusti ran to her neighbor's home saying she had been stabbed in the arm by two local drug dealers.
Kathy Sagusti she was known to us from some prostitution arrests.
And one of our other local PDs had also had her on some credit card matters.
She was basically a crack cocaine addict who was doing prostitution and petty crimes to support her habit.
Sagusti identified her attackers as 19-year-old Corey Maeweather and 20-year-old Kwame Henry.
Maeweather and 20-year-old Kwame Henry.
Sagusti said they had been doing drugs together, and she was stabbed in the arm after a minor dispute.
And during her interview, Sagusti reluctantly told police another story, about an incident that happened in her home just one week earlier.
She said these same two drug dealers, Corey Maeweather and Kwame Henry, along with a third man, Stanley Obas, came to her home with a 19-year-old woman, Materon Smith.
Materon Smith.
Smith was a drug runner, whom the man suspected of stealing $2,000 worth of cocaine.
Please, no.
What the hell is going on down there?
I'm going to see what you guys are doing.
After they took Smith to the basement, Sagusti heard Smith cry.
Sagusti heard Smith cry.
Sagusti admitted she was using drugs at the time, and never saw what happened.
But she believed that Smith had been murdered.
She said the three men later carried a large box from her basement.
She relayed about a fight, and they went to the basement.
And she heard screams and cries from this girl, and then silence.
And then she relayed that she never saw this girl again.
As we canvassed the neighborhood, we wound up finding some people at a local business.
Some secretaries were looking out the window, and they saw three black males carrying a large heavy box and really struggling with it.
But police were suspicious for a number of reasons.
First, they could find no traces of blood or evidence of violence in Kathy Sagusti's basement.
And second, they could find no record of any 19-year-old woman by the name of Materon Smith.
When police arrested Corey Maeweather for the stabbing of Kathy Sagusti, he denied any knowledge of Materon Smith or her whereabouts.
Without a body or any corroborating forensic evidence, all police had to go on were the suspicions of an admitted drug user.
Two weeks have passed since Kathy Sagusti told police about the 19-year-old woman, Materon Smith, whom she suspected was murdered in her basement.
In a cemetery near Sagusti's home, a worker noticed an unusual smell coming from the burial vault.
Burial vaults had once been used to store bodies during the winter months when the ground was too hard and cold to dig the graves.
But this burial vaults had long since been abandoned.
Inside, the man made a gruesome discovery.
Underneath some newspapers was the partially closed, badly decomposed body of a black female.
Coroner Zachary Lysek was called to the scene.
It was very cool and damp inside the dead house at the time.
There was a very foul odor of decomposition.
There was thousands of flies flying around and several thousand maggots that were crawling over the floor and over the body.
One hand was wrapped with twine, an apparent restraining device.
The victim's pants were down around her ankles.
She was about 5 foot 2, and approximately 110 pounds.
The newspapers that covered the body were many weeks old, and were no help in identifying the time of death.
The volt had been bolted from the outside, which provided some important information about the possible cause of death.
She could not have put herself in the house and then put a bolt on the outside of the door.
So we knew that she had to have been placed there by someone else.
The manner of death was homicidal violence.
And she certainly didn't die from an accidental or natural causes.
It was some act of homicide.
But we could not say whether her throat was cut, because the throat area had been eaten away by maggot infestation.
And there was no way to give an opinion.
We couldn't say whether she was stabbed.
We couldn't say whether she was strangled.
Police assumed the body was that of Materon Smith, the 19-year-old drug runner Kathy Sagusti suspected had been murdered in her house.
But forensic tests quickly dispelled that notion.
This victim was much younger than 19 years old.
An analysis of her teeth indicated she was in early puberty.
I believe she was 13.
We were able to tell from the level of eruption of certain teeth that, you know, that was consistent with somebody who might have been 13 at the time.
Even though I don't believe she had any baby teeth left.
To find out when the victim died, scientists turned to the only evidence they had, the insects that were on the dead body.
Some of the species of flies will be found almost immediately after death, within a matter of seconds to a matter of a few minutes.
After death, they'll be laying eggs within the first of two hours, three hours, after death, given the adequate environmental conditions.
If it's 80 degrees, it's a nice summer day, and we have sunlight or daylight.
The flies will be out searching.
And if you die, they're going to find you a very, very fast.
Dr. Haskell discovered that the larvae on the body were third stage.
When he allowed some of these larvae to develop into full maturity, he discovered that the species was Phormia regina, otherwise known as the black blow fly, a species common in rural areas during the summer.
If Dr. Haskell could determine how long the larvae had been on the body, he would know when the victim died.
But temperature and weather conditions can affect insect development and must be taken into account.
If we have the temperatures in the 80's, or 90's, or pushing 100, those maggots will grow and develop very, very fast.
100, those maggots will grow and develop very, very fast.
So it is critical to have the weather information to evaluate, to see whether that growth and development is slow, medium, or fast.
Dr. Haskell researched local temperatures in the weeks and months preceding discovery of the body.
He also needed to calculate the difference between the outside temperatures and those inside the vault, which were much cooler.
So he took temperature readings inside the vault, and correlated them with the outside temperatures.
With these calculations, and knowing the larvae were in their third stage of development, Dr. Haskell estimated that blow flies deposited their eggs on the dead body between July 27 and the 29th.
Dr. Haskell estimated that blow flies deposited their eggs on the dead body between July 27 and the 29th.
This was the same time Kathy Sagusti suspected the murder took place in her basement.
But if the victim wasn't 19-year-old Materon Smith, who was she?
Smith, who was she?
When police discovered the decomposed body of a young woman in a deserted cemetery vault, they had few clues to her identity.
An analysis of the victim's teeth revealed she was just 13 years old.
Police conducted a nationwide computer search on all missing 13-year-old black females who were 5 foot 2" and 110 pounds.
2" and 110 pounds.
The name Richezza Williams was one of the matches.
Richezza Williams was a runaway from the middle class family in Long Island, New York, and was reported missing by her family a few weeks earlier.
When her dental records were compared to the teeth of the victim, there were similarities.
It was a difficult situation.
But fortunately, she had some chipping of her upper front teeth.
And we noticed that when we examined the remains, that there was also chipping on the upper front teeth, and they matched that remarkably well.
And our conclusion was, within a high degree of dental certainty, that that individual was Richezza Williams.
We're just here for some follow-up questions about the other day.
When Kathy Sagusti was shown the photograph of Richezza Williams, she confirmed that she was the woman she knew as 19-year-old Materon Smith.
Williams had changed her age and identity after she ran away from home.
For Sandra Taylor, Richezza's teacher and Girl Scout leader, news of her death came as a shock.
I had no idea.
No idea that um, um, she would eventually go somewhere and pose to be 19 and still 13.
Richezza was an exceptionally beautiful young girl.
Beautiful black, flowing long hair.
Very pleasant for anybody to look like-- look at.
You know. Just gorgeous.
You know, nice personality.
Very friendly.
Friendly to everybody.
People she knew.
People she didn't know.
After Richezza finished grade school, she didn't attend middle school regularly.
Her father died.
Richezza started to rebel and became a discipline problem.
I had a conversation with Richezza myself.
And I told her, you must go to school.
And I told her also that if she did not, I was going to have her move in with me, and I would see that she went to school.
I was going to have her move in with me, and I would see that she went to school.
And I would pick her up and make sure she went there.
So I knew there was some kind of problems going on there.
Instead, Richezza Williams got involved running drugs between New York and Pennsylvania, which is how she met Corey Maeweather, Kwame Henry, and Stanley Obas.
Maeweather, Kwame Henry, and Stanley Obas.
Kathy Sagusti said that Maeweather and Henry accused Richezza of stealing some cocaine, and that Stanley Obas prevented Sagusti from going downstairs.
Richezza of stealing some cocaine, and that Stanley Obas prevented Sagusti from going downstairs.
Over the next several hours, Maeweather and Henry took several items from the kitchen before returning to the basement.
Miss Sagusti could not tell us what happened down there, but she did hear sounds of crying from Richezza, don't do this to me.
You know, she heard sort of like, slapping around, and that this young girl was pleading with them to stop, whatever they were doing down there.
At some point, all the noise stopped in the basement.
A search of Sagusti's home corroborated parts of her story.
Several kitchen utensils tested positive for human enzymes, leading to speculation that they were used as implements of torture.
Hairs consistent with Richezza Williams were also found in the basement.
Well, the case was a circumstantial evidence case, really from the outset.
Although we had a Kathleen Sagusti, who was able to tell us that she knew the three men, that she saw Richezza Williams in her home about this time frame, end of July time frame, no one could actually say what happened in that basement.
With no forensic evidence connecting the three men to Richezza Williams' murder, police returned to the cemetery vault a few weeks after the body was discovered.
With screens, they sifted through all the debris on the floor of the vault.
They found something unusual.
A used piece of chewing gum.
It had been there probably for 10 days or so.
Maybe even 15 days before we found it.
So when we found it, it was hard as a rock, and it wound up being very well preserved.
The gum was red and about an inch and a half long.
It was completely dried out, and appeared to have the imprint of teeth marks.
There was more news for investigators.
Corey Maeweather had more than just a drug habit.
He had a habit of constantly chewing Big Red brand gum, and carried packs of it wherever he went.
Police also remembered he was chewing Big Red gum when they questioned him about Richezza Williams' murder.
The question now was whether it would work as evidence.
A used piece of chewing gum found in the burial vault near Chester Williams' body was the only piece of evidence that could tie Corey Maeweather and his two accomplices to the murder.
The gum was sent for DNA testing to see if it contained saliva could be matched to one of the suspects.
But almost immediately, investigators realized they had made a mistake.
The DNA test required scientists to remove a piece of the gum, which would alter or destroy the teeth marks.
Fortunately, investigators retrieved the gum before DNA testing started and sent it instead to a forensic odontologist for analysis.
Preserving the gum without altering it presented a daunting challenge to Dr. Dennis Asen.
I think the problem that faced me at that time is, how do we make a copy of this chewing gum without distorting evidence?
Without destroying the evidence?
After freezing the chewing gum, Dr. Asen attempted to make a copy by mixing together a plastic derivative known as an alginate.
Dr. Asen attempted to make a copy by mixing together a plastic derivative known as an alginate.
He placed the alginate mixture into a mold, and then placed the frozen piece of gum on top of it.
When he removed the frozen gum, it left an impression in the mold, essentially a negative copy.
Into that impression, he injected a substance called a polyvinyl, which hardens quickly, but remains flexible.
This process produces a permanent, virtually indestructible duplicate, what's known as an exemplar of the piece of gum found at the crime scene.
The next step was to compare that exemplar with a cast of Corey Maeweather's teeth.
As if trying to match a piece of a jigsaw puzzle, he ran the exemplar over the cast and found a perfect match.
Mr. Maeweather had a little cross bite.
There was one tooth that was out of line.
And it created a bit of a step and a ledge in his dentition.
And in the gum, there is this step or ledge, and that was the focal point that we were able to seat the gum, and it was very, very clear.
Dr. Asen believes that the gum fell from Maeweathers mouth when carried Richezza William's body into the vault.
Spitting it out would have distorted the bite marks.
Prosecutors believe that the men brought over Richezza Williams to Sagusti's home to confront her about the missing cocaine.
What business?
Come on, let's go.
Why are you pulling on me?
While in the basement, the men tortured her with various items they found in the kitchen.
The lack of blood in the basement told investigators that Richezza Williams most likely had been strangled.
Williams' body was undoubtedly inside the large cardboard box the three men carried from Sagusti's basement as they headed in the direction of the nearby cemetery.
But Corey Maeweather's mistake was the chewing gum that accidentally fell from his mouth as he carried Richezza Williams' body into the cemetery vault, proving that he was inside the vault when the body was dumped.
The insect activity on the body told forensic scientists when Richezza Williams had been murdered, which coincided with the date Kathy Sagusti last saw Williams in her home.
Sagusti last saw Williams in her home.
The blow fly larvae, the chewing gum, and Sagusti's testimony all pointed to Corey Maeweather as the murderer.
I don't think he gave up until we, uh, the bite mark evidence came back.
That's really kind of what sunk his boat.
Uh, they hired their own expert who basically came to the same conclusion we did.
Uh, he had some very unique dentition, and just kind of sold the case.
It really supports the fact of how important the crime scene evidence is, and how, you know, the time needs to be taken to examine the scene thoroughly and look for every little piece of evidence.
And maybe something as simple as a piece of gum or syrup bite that helps you to identify who the suspect may be.
And in this case, it proved to be positive.
The decision not to test the gum for DNA until after the dental analysis was a huge break for investigators.
DNA tests conducted later on the gum for saliva were inconclusive.
Had the DNA testing been done first, the dental impressions would have been destroyed, and prosecutors would have lost the only positive forensic evidence against Corey Maeweather.
In October of 1998, Corey Maeweather pleaded guilty to first degree murder and avoided the death sentence.
He was sentenced to life in prison.
He also implicated his two accomplices.
Kwame Henry was not apprehended until several years later in Trinidad, and was also sentenced to life in prison.
Stanley Obas has never been apprehended, and is still at large.
Those who investigated this case were gratified by the outcome, but are still haunted by the fate of a beautiful 13-year-old girl who strayed, despite the best efforts of family and friends.
You know, she's still someone's child.
And uh, kids just get rather strong headed.
Sometimes, they're way ahead of their years.
And unfortunately, she got in way over her head, and she's a person who will never have a second chance to, uh, right her mistakes.
Since this tragedy happened, believe you me, I have put this into my curriculum, and I talk about it in classroom.
I have put this into my curriculum, and I talk about it in classroom.
And I talk about it in chapel service with the children to let them know, when you leave here, you have to be aware of wolves in sheep's clothing.
The Bible speaks of that.
So I have to let them know what had happened in this situation so that it won't happen again.
Two decades after Adolf Hitler terrorized Europe, a high-ranking religious figure in the United States, Archbishop Valerian Trifa was embroiled in controversy.
Archbishop Valerian Trifa was embroiled in controversy.
Romanian immigrants identified Archbishop Trifa as a man with a secret past, responsible for the murders of hundreds of Jews during the war.
Trifa denied it.
To see whether Trifa played a role in these horrific war crimes, the United States government looked for scientific proof.
Sir, could you confirm your name for me, please?
My name is Viorel Trifa.
In 1950, a Romanian immigrant, Viorel Trifa, came to the United States to start a new life.
Trifa told United States immigration officials that he was a victim of the Nazis during the war.
He said that when he left his native Romania, he was taken prisoner by the German Gestapo.
He said he was held at the Dachau concentration camp, and was lucky to escape with his life.
After the war, he said he struggled to survive.
And then, like hundreds of thousands of refugees, came to America under the Displaced Persons Act.
The Displaced Persons Act was a statute enacted by the US Congress and signed by the president in 1948 that had the noble purpose of rescuing victims of persecution in Europe who were languishing in the so-called DP camps, and resettling them in the United States, where life would be better.
Congress and signed by the president in 1948 that had the noble purpose of rescuing victims of persecution in Europe who were languishing in the so-called DP camps, and resettling them in the United States, where life would be better.
This is a copy of one of the forms Trifa filled out for entry into this country.
In this official account of his treatment by the Germans, he says he was a political prisoner held by the Gestapo.
In 1957, Trifa was granted US citizenship.
Trifa had strong ties to the Romanian Orthodox Church.
And after coming to the United States, he was ordained a priest, and quickly rose up through the church ranks.
Trifa became Archbishop of the Diocese of Detroit, and took the religious name Valerian.
But soon, a cloud of suspicion and controversy surrounded Archbishop Trifa.
Some of the Romanian immigrants in his church thought they recognized Trifa from their years in Romania.
They said that a man named Trifa had been an ardent follower of Adolf Hitler during the war, and that Trifa was a leader of the Iron Guard, a pro-Nazi group in Romania.
The Iron Guard was the largest of the fascist movements in Romania.
It was violent.
It was anti-Semitic.
It was the equivalent of the Nazi movement in Romania.
This picture shows an Iron Guard rally during the early years of World War II.
The similarities to Nazism, the solute, the uniforms, are clearly evident.
And like the Nazis, the Iron Guard was also anti-Semitic.
And like Hitler, the Iron Guard encouraged violence against the Jews, and against others they perceived as enemies.
Archbishop Trifa adamantly denied he had ever been a member of the Iron Guard.
If the charge was true, it meant Trifa had lied to US immigration officials.
And it also meant that a high profile religious leader in the United States was, in fact, a Nazi war criminal.
Romanian immigrants living in the United States identified a high-ranking religious figure, Archbishop Valerian Trifa, as a Nazi war criminal from World War II.
Valerian Trifa, as a Nazi war criminal from World War II.
They believed that Archbishop Valerian Trifa had once been a member of Romania's Iron Guard, sympathetic to Adolf Hitler, and a group who encouraged violence against Romanian Jews.
On January 20, 1941, Viorel Trifa had broadcast a hate-filled radio address from the Romanian capital city of Bucharest.
That radio address encouraging violence against Jews culminated in the round-up thousands of Jews in Bucharest the next day.
News accounts described the slaughter known as a pogrom.
Department of Justice Prosecutor Eli Rosenbaum reads one of the news account.
Perhaps the most horrifying single episode of the Pogrom was the quote, unquote "kosher butchering" last Wednesday night of more than 200 Jews in the municipal slaughterhouse.
The Jews, who had been rounded up after several hours of Iron Guard raids, were put into several trucks and carried off to the slaughterhouse.
Guard raids, were put into several trucks and carried off to the slaughterhouse.
There, the Greenshirts-- he means the Iron Guards-- forced them to undress and led them to the chopping blocks, where they cut their throats in a horrible parody of the traditional Jewish methods of slaughtering fowl and livestock.
Romanian immigrants told US authorities that Viorel Trifa was also the editor of the Iron Guard newspaper, "Libertatea," which also called for violence against Jews.
Trifa's his role, as far as the Pogrom was concerned, was one of a propagandist.
One of an advocate of antisemitic hatred.
One of an inciter whose writings created an atmosphere in which this kind of violence not only became permissible and acceptable, but encouraged.
The US government now faced a dilemma.
Was there any way of finding out whether Archbishop Trifa was a past member of the Iron Guard?
The only apparent evidence against Trifa was the decades old memories of his fellow Romanian immigrants.
All of these cases were and are among the most challenging ones that anyone in law enforcement could ever imagine confronting.
All of these cases involved crimes that took place long ago, decades earlier.
It's difficult enough to prove a mugging that took place yesterday.
But one Romanian refugee, a New York dentist named Charles Kremer, refused to let the case die.
Kremer's relatives were among the Jews killed at the hands of Romania's Iron Guard.
And he vowed to bring Archbishop Trifa to justice.
For 20 years, he petitioned the US government to examine the case.
In 1973, the Department of Justice officially opened an investigation into whether Archbishop Trifa had played a role in murdering Jews during World War II.
US prosecutors approached the West German government for assistance.
German government for assistance.
The Germans kept meticulous records during the war.
And in their archives, investigators found 22 postcards written by a man named Trifa who had been a member of the Iron Guard.
The postcards were found in a record group in West Germany, not on the communist bloc, but in West Germany, in a record group that was called Small Collections.
It was just small miscellaneous collections that the German archivists did not know how to file.
And so, they filed them in a record group called Small Miscellaneous Collections.
Small Miscellaneous Collections.
Whoever wrote the postcards was no concentration camp survivor.
The writer was a guest of the Nazi government, and spent the war years in relative comfort.
They essentially describe what he's doing during the day, if he's seen a movie, what the weather's like.
Very normal, mundane type of stuff that an individual at peace, without much fear of his life, might write to his comrades while on vacation.
The cards were signed by Viorel Trifa.
If they were written by the man known in the United States as Archbishop Valerian Trifa, the archbishop had lied to immigration officials.
Forensic scientists looked for some way to prove that Archbishop Valerian Trifa had written these postcards.
Trifa had written these postcards.
For decades, rumors circulated that Archbishop Valerian Trifa, a high-ranking religious figure in the Romanian Orthodox Church in the United States, was once a member of Romania's Iron Guard, a pro-Nazi group that encouraged the murder of hundreds of Jews during World War II.
Archbishop Trifa denied he was a member.
But when US government officials found 22 postcards allegedly written by Trifa from Germany during the war, they asked document examiner Gideon Epstein to conduct a handwriting analysis.
No two people have ever been found to have the same handwriting.
Not twins.
Not identical twins.
Handwriting is composed of motor, muscular, and nervous movements of the body all working together.
And it becomes habitual, and unique, and individual, almost from the point of time when people start to write.
Epstein spent months comparing signatures on the postcards with samples of Archbishop Trifa's known signatures, like this one from an official church document.
The whole forensic concept is that you're comparing something that's disputed against something that's known.
And handwriting is basically the same thing.
We have usually a document or a writing that's disputed, and then we have writings that are known.
And the question is, did the person who make the known make the disputed?
Epstein noticed that the writings in all cases were done with extreme speed, or what is called fluency.
So-called fluent writers have wide variations in how they write.
And those variations are almost always the same, no matter how often they're repeated.
But to try to simulate or copy the style of a writer that has a great deal of variation, and to be able to simulate that variation at the same speed, and the rhythm, and fluency, with all of the unconscious habits that the writer has, it's an impossibility.
After months of analysis, Gideon Epstein reached his conclusion.
Gideon Epstein reached his conclusion.
There was no doubt.
The writer of the German postcards was Valerian Trifa.
This was proof that Trifa lied to immigration authorities, but he vowed to fight any deportation.
Prosecutors were concerned.
Their only solid evidence was the handwriting analysis and eyewitness identifications that were more than 30 years old.
But looking at a blow up photo of one of the postcards, investigators saw what they thought might be a clue.
The card had only a return address, apparently just an update on where the writer was living.
On a large blank space, investigators saw what they thought might be a finger print.
They petitioned the West German government for the actual postcard and were denied.
The West Germans did not want the postcard damaged.
And in the 1970s, the powders used to detect fingerprints would have permanently altered the card.
The case stalled for years.
I believe that the immigration service felt that the case was just too difficult.
They couldn't handle it.
What brought the case back to life was a new piece of forensic technology, the laser.
In the 1970s, researchers discovered that laser beams react with the oils that form fingerprints, causing the prints literally to glow or luminesce.
The procedure was non-invasive.
In other words, a print, if it existed, could be taken from the German postcard without damaging it.
In 1982, the West Germans brought the postcard to FBI headquarters in Washington, DC to be examined with laser technology.
It was classified technology that enabled them, they believed, to detect fingerprints that could not be detected using traditional means.
So sensitive was this technology-- that is to say, so secret was it-- that when a German official brought the postcard, the original, with a Justice Department escort to the FBI, the German official was allowed to go up to the door of the room in which the machine sat and no further.
He was barred from even seeing it.
But there were a number of problems.
Investigators were not even sure the postcard contained a print.
And so much time had passed since the postcard was written, there were questions about whether the finger oils that might be present would be visible, even with laser technology.
In 1982, the US government's investigation of Valerian Trifa, the Romanian Archbishop of Detroit, was coming to a head.
Prosecutors suspected that Trifa had lied about his involvement in the murder of hundreds of Jews during World War II.
Trifa said they had the wrong man.
That Trifa was a common name in Romania, and that it was another man named Trifa who had been the member of the pro-Nazi Iron Guard movement.
The case came down to one postcard signed by Viorel Trifa in Germany during World War II.
Forensic scientists suspected that it may contain a fingerprint.
If a print was found, and it matched Archbishop Valerian Trifa, there would be solid proof that he had lied about his past.
Trifa, there would be solid proof that he had lied about his past.
Analyst Ron Capaco put the card under a diffused laser beam.
The laser light reacts with human finger oils to reveal prints.
But in this case, the card was more than 40 years old, and there were questions about whether anything would be found.
Capaco, examining the card through orange filtered goggles that eliminate all sources of light other than the laser, was surprised at what he saw.
A clear print glowing on a blank area of the postcard.
Despite the age of the postcard, it had absorbed enough finger oil to form a clear print.
The question was whether the fingerprint on the postcard was the fingerprint of Archbishop Trifa.
Capaco photographed the print on the postcard.
In this photo, the print, a left thumb print, can be clearly identified.
Investigators now went to the document Trifa entered the US with in 1950.
Trifa entered the US with in 1950.
At that time, he was fingerprinted.
The thumbprint of that document was compared with the thumbprint taken from the postcard.
It was a perfect match.
The prints on both documents were the left thumb print of Valerian Trifa.
The ultimate proof is a latent fingerprint.
There's no known way to fabricate a latent fingerprint in a way that is undetectable.
So when we got word from the, uh, the Bureau that their technology had succeeded in, uh, finding Trifa's print on this old document, something that had never happened in any of our cases before nor since, we were, of course, ecstatic.
We were ecstatic.
This 40-year-old print is the oldest latent print ever detected by any law enforcement agency in the world.
Investigators speculate that when Trifa wrote the card using the fountain pens of the day, his finger oils mixed with a small amount of INK, sealing the oils into the porous paper of the card.
The ink faded over time, but the thumbprint remained intact.
The print was almost invisible to the naked eye, but clearly visible under the new technology of the laser.
Well, the postcard was a very important piece of evidence.
Because not only were we are able to identify his handwriting, that he denied making, but also the thumb print was identified as his.
And there is no better form of personal identification than to have both the fingerprint and the handwriting of an individual identified on the same piece of evidence.
There was no way he could have known it, that the postcard he so casually sent in 1942 would seal his fate some 40 years later.
They went for the fingerprint to see if they could get it.
Um, prosecutors always want to have the most truth available on hand.
When informed of the palm print match, Archbishop Trifa surrendered his citizenship.
Archbishop Trifa surrendered his citizenship.
For Romanian refugees, like Dr. Charles Kremer, who would lost relatives at the hands of Trifa's Iron Guard, the 40 year wait for justice was a long one.
I would have been much more satisfied if the trial went on continuously, and exposed this murderer with all the crimes that he committed, and let the people at large know that a man that's changed the gun for the cross does not belong in the United States.
For two years, no other country was willing to accept Trifa.
In 1984, Portugal agreed to take him in.
After a youth spent as a fascist leader, and adulthood spent as a religious figure hoping to escape his past, Valerian Trifa ended his days as an exile, dying in Portugal in 1987.
Though decades had passed since Hitler and his henchmen terrorized Europe, the traces they left behind provided lasting evidence bearing witness to their crimes.
We don't have the murder weapon.
We don't have a body.
What we have is paper.
It's paper that survives to bring these people to justice.
Some with fingerprints, some without, really speaks volumes about crimes that were committed by Trifa and by others.
And it's those documents that survive.
Even though the victims didn't survive, the documents to survive to make these prosecutions possible.
In 1981, six-year-old Cassie Hansen disappeared from an evening church service without a trace.
There were no eyewitnesses.
The only clue was strand of very rare and very unusual hair.
It was the most telling physical evidence police had.
On a cold November night in 1981, the Hansen family headed to a service at Jehovah Evangelical Lutheran Church near Saint Paul, Minnesota.
Ellen Hansen and her two daughters, Cassie and Vanessa had been looking forward to family night at the church.
Cassie and Vanessa had been looking forward to family night at the church.
Bill, the children's father had another commitment and wasn't able to go with them.
It is etched in my memory that we had supper, and then the girls got in the car, Ellen was driving.
And they were in the garage, and Cassie was sitting in the passenger seat of the car.
And she was blowing kisses at me through the window, you know, waving goodbye.
Ellen, Cassie, and Vanessa arrived at the church early.
The girls went downstairs to the children's area where Sunday school classes usually were held.
Cassie told her mother she had to go to the bathroom and said she'd be right back.
A few minutes later, I followed her and she wasn't around anywhere.
And so I went upstairs, went outside, yelled her name a couple of times.
I got the phone call from Ellen saying that Cassie was missing.
And, you know, my heart stopped, and I think I was just breathing heavy, you know, and just thinking, oh, boy, this is-- because you know your child, and you know that she would just not walk away from something like that.
Right away I knew something was definitely wrong.
When Cassie couldn't be found anywhere in the church, the St. Paul Police were called to the scene.
Within an hour, Cassie's photograph was distributed to local newspapers and television stations.
The search lasted throughout the night.
We stayed up all night long.
People came all night long to help.
There were a couple hundred people helping us search.
Police went door to door in the neighborhood and volunteers made hundreds of telephone calls, all without success.
Early the next morning, police made the gruesome discovery.
Cassie Hansen's body was found in a dumpster behind an auto repair shop just three miles from the church.
This undercover officer was the first policeman on the scene.
It truly incensed the community.
It incensed a lot of police officers.
It was as if, it was he seemed to be treating her as a piece of trash.
Cassie's leather shoes, minus the buckles, were found in two separate locations not far from the dumpster.
Caroline Lowe covered the story for WCCO-TV in Minneapolis.
The idea of a church is one place you can go, and you'd let your daughter go to a restroom.
That's something you would do.
You feel a safeness that these basically good people are all in their together.
The last thing you would ever expect.
And we had no reason to expect a stranger would come into a church and abduct a child.
The autopsy revealed signs of sexual assault.
Semen found on her dress revealed the perpetrator had Type O blood.
And some foreign hairs also were found.
The cause of death was strangulation with a two and a half inch belt.
Abrasions on Cassie's chest indicated another belt had been used as a restraint.
A member of the church recalled seeing a white man 50 to 60 years old with dark glasses and white hair in the vicinity of the church bathrooms on the night of the abduction.
50 to 60 years old with dark glasses and white hair in the vicinity of the church bathrooms on the night of the abduction.
It wasn't much, but it was the only lead investigators had.
After Cassie Hansen's murder, police attempted to locate all past sex offenders in the Minneapolis, St. Paul areas.
We had a total of 107 people who had been identified by the community, or through police investigation, of being possible suspects.
Of those 107 individuals, 57 of them either lived or worked in the area where the little girl was abducted from.
Police interrogated many of these individuals, and soon, they not only had a suspect, but also a confession.
Vondell Quanly, a woman from Texas, who had claimed to have killed Cassie Hansen.
And when she came to the attention of St. Paul Police and allegedly made a confession, it turned out that what she did was read details in the paper, and then recite them.
And she said, I claim I acted alone.
Well, it was quite obvious that she couldn't generate seminal fluid, and that this was a sham and a fraud.
Police found two other witnesses who saw a white male carrying a motionless child near the auto body shop dumpster on the night of the murder.
This was consistent with the description given by the church member who saw an elderly man near the church bathrooms.
With no other leads, police contacted the FBI's Behavioral Science Unit in Washington, DC.
Science Unit in Washington, DC.
These profilers analyzed the background and behavior of criminals who have committed similar crimes, and make recommendations about the type of individual who should be considered a suspect.
Former agent, John Douglas, created the behavioral profile of Cassie Hansen's killer for the St. Paul Police.
Douglas said that the killer would be a white male, a loner with a poor self-image who probably had a history of child sex offenses.
Douglas also predicted that the man would frequent parks where children played.
He would be nocturnal and drive around at night.
After the murder, he wouldn't flee the area.
He would feel what he had done was justified.
He may have kept a souvenir from the crime.
Most important, he would be obsessed with the murder and need to talk about it.
One of the tips called into police was from Dorothy Noga, a massage parlor employee.
How's that? -Terrific.
She told police that one of her customers was a taxicab driver, Stuart Knowlton, had been in her massage parlor the day after Cassie Hansen's murder.
By the way, Dorothy-- If anybody asks, would you tell them I was in here last night, too?
If anybody asks, would you tell them I was in here last night, too?
I was in here last night, too?
Which made her suspicious.
During police questioning, Knowlton denied he was involved in any way.
Knowlton also claimed to have an alibi.
He said he was on duty driving his taxicab on the night of the murder.
If his alibi checked out, police had hit a dead end.
Three months passed since Cassie Hansen's murder.
And police finally had a suspect in 57-year-old taxicab driver, Stuart Knowlton.
But Knowlton had an alibi.
He said he was working on the night of the murder.
In the back alley underground of massage parlors, it's not unusual for clients to confess their most perverse sexual fantasies and sometimes their secrets.
Masseuse Dorothy Noga had many clients who confided in her.
Knowlton was one of them.
He asked Dorothy to say he was at the massage parlor on the night of Cassie Hansen's murder.
Noga went to the police and offered to tape record her conversations with Knowlton.
But Police declined her offer as too dangerous.
Janice Rettman also was familiar with Stuart Knowlton.
Miss Rettman was head of St. Paul's Public Housing Office.
Eight months before Cassie Hansen's murder, a resident filed a formal complaint against Stuart Knowlton alleging he made sexual advances towards some of the children.
I can't remember anyone being as chilling as he was.
Rettman made the same offer to police that Dorothy Noga had.
To conceal a wire on her body, and talk to Stuart Knowlton about the murder of little Cassie Hansen.
This time police accept it.
When Janice Rettman met with Knowlton, she asked if he had been following news reports about Cassie's murder.
Knowlton admitted he had.
Then, he made a critical mistake.
He said that Cassie had been beaten about the face.
This fact had not been released to the public.
Judge Thomas Poch, who prosecuted this case said, this was their first breakthrough.
That was crucial.
And that was very critical, because no one had revealed to the press, to the media, to anyone that she's been beaten.
And only the killer could have known that.
Meanwhile, we didn't have any witnesses, and it was entirely a circumstantial case.
As police prepared to close in, Stuart Knowlton was crossing the street in downtown St. Paul.
Stuart Knowlton was crossing the street in downtown St. Paul.
He was hit by a car and seriously injured.
He was rushed to the hospital where his leg was amputated below the knee.
It just seemed to me that divine intervention was there, and that the children were going to be protected, in that he would not be able to grab another child.
When police checked Knowlton's alibi, they discovered that on the night of the murder, he had not turned in his logbook.
When questioned, Knowlton said his logbook was stolen.
Despite police warnings, the masseuse, Dorothy Noga called Stuart Knowlton on her own.
Dorothy Noga called Stuart Knowlton on her own.
She, too, asked Knowlton if he'd been following the news reports of Cassie Hansen's murder.
She was a hero for us.
She told us that during one of these conversations, that he admitted to her that had killed the little girl.
That he had, in fact, killed Cassie.
Dorothy Noga agreed and wanted to help in case, and stated that she would be willing to talk to him and to tape these conversations.
And she did this hours on end.
But he wouldn't repeat the confession on tape.
Later, when Dorothy Noga left her massage parlor, a man jumped out of the darkness and slashed her throat.
He ran away leaving her for dead.
I proceeded to the hospital.
Her throat had been slit, that her blood pressure was down to zero, that they were certain she was going to die.
Dorothy Noga recovered from her attack.
In an attempt to recall the events surrounding her assault, Dorothy Noga underwent hypnosis.
Dorothy Noga underwent hypnosis.
Through hypnosis, Dorothy Noga remembered the man who stabbed her that night and left her for dead.
She alleged it was Stuart Knowlton, who attacked her just hours after the telephone conversation in which he confessed to the murder of Cassie Hansen.
He jabbed the knife straight on in, like that on my neck.
And then he pulled it out.
Well, then I knew, you know, that he had cut me, and I turned my head like that.
And he said, I'll teach you not to talk.
And then he cut it and just slit it all the way down.
Minnesota State Law prohibits testimony from individuals with hypnotically enhanced recollection, so no charges were filed for this incident.
Scientists investigating Cassie Hansen's murder had a semen sample which showed the perpetrator's blood was Type O. In 1983, DNA testing was still years away from widespread use in criminal cases.
Type O. In 1983, DNA testing was still years away from widespread use in criminal cases.
Stuart Knowlton had Type O blood, but so did 37% of the population.
So police obtained a hair sample from Stuart Knowlton, and sent it along with Cassie Hansen's clothing to the FBI forensic laboratory in Washington, DC.
There the technicians used a spatula to scrape loose hairs and fibers from Cassie's clothing.
Under a stereo microscope, those hairs and fibers were analyzed and compared to hairs taken from Stuart Knowlton.
The comparison is subjective.
Even if the specimens look similar, comparing hair samples is not like matching fingerprints.
Al Robillard was in charge of the FBI's Hair and Fiber Unit at the time.
Hair comparisons, it's not a means of absolute personal identification.
Because I say that the hair matches an individual, or has the same microscopic characteristics as that individual's hairs, does not absolutely mean it came from him.
The reason for that is, hairs are not so unique that they allow you to reach an absolute conclusion.
It's possible that two hairs that are so nearly alike they can't be distinguished microscopically, could come from two separate individuals.
But in this case, Robillard had made an interesting discovery.
He found a hair on Cassie Hansen's clothing that was so unique, he had never seen it before, nor has he seen it since.
It was so unusual.
In my career looking at hairs at the FBI laboratory, I've never seen, or I've never matched a hair that had this unusual characteristic.
I've never seen, or I've never matched a hair that had this unusual characteristic.
A hair disease called pili annulati.
Commonly, that s referred to as either ringed hair or banded hair.
So I thought this was rather significant.
Pili annulati is a hair shaft abnormality, which is very rare and medical experts don't know what causes it.
If you think, looking at a racoon's tail, you actually see bands.
And these bands are created, because there's a breakdown in that area of the cuticle that begins to separate.
When Robillard analyzed Stuart Knowlton's hair, he discovered that it showed signs of the same condition, pili annulati.
No doubt about it.
Thousands of hairs over the course of my career, and I only saw this, or was I able to put two hairs, associate a victim to a suspect, not only through the microscopic characteristics, but also through a disease of the hair.
With this discovery, Stuart Knowlton was arrested and charged with Cassie Hansen's murder.
Dorothy Noga's testimony held the courtroom spectators spellbound.
She told the jury what Knowlton said during a telephone call just hours before she was attacked.
Knowlton said he was driving his taxicab in the vicinity of the Jehovah Evangelical Lutheran Church when he needed to use the bathroom.
Knowlton ran into Cassie Hansen.
Hi, how are you? -Good.
What's your name? -Cassie.
Are you here for the church services today?
Are you here with your mom and dad?
Just my mom.
He asked her if she wanted to play a game.
Uh, what kind of game?
When he took her outside to his taxi, she became frightened and started to scream.
In the taxi, when Cassie was struggling to get away, Knowlton strangled her with his belt.
Knowlton strangled her with his belt.
Later, he put her body in a dumpster a few miles away.
He took the buckle off her shoes, possibly as a trophy, and dropped the shoes in two different locations.
Stuart had a shoe fetish.
When he talked about shoes at first, it meant nothing to me.
In retrospect, it was probably more significant than I thought.
The description of Stuart Knowlton's rare hair condition convinced the jury that the banded hair found on Cassie Hansen's clothing came from Stuart Knowlton's clothing.
Knowlton's clothing.
The evidence from the FBI laboratory was the absolutely critical one piece of evidence that was absolutely essential to tying him in, and to being able to get a conviction of Stuart Knowlton.
Stuart Knowlton was found guilty of first degree murder, and second degree misconduct, and sentenced to life in prison.
To this day, the Hansen family visits Cassie's grave, and hope that Cassie's death might serve as a warning to others.
The Hansens founded an organization called, Save Cassie's Friends, which uses print and video materials to heighten awareness that child abduction can happen anytime, anywhere.
Save Cassie's Friends, which uses print and video materials to heighten awareness that child abduction can happen anytime, anywhere.
No one was joking in Spokane, Washington, on April Fool's Day 1996.
First, a bomb went off outside the office of a local newspaper.
Then, another inside a bank.
Two armed men entered and robbed the bank of $50,000.
It was apparently the work of well-trained criminals.
But one of the bombers made a crucial mistake.
A simple pair of jeans he was wearing that day would later reveal his identity.
Nestled at the falls of the Spokane River, the city of Spokane, Washington, is the cultural and economic center of an area known as the Inland Northwest, which includes parts of Washington, Idaho, Montana, and Oregon.
The region is known for its beautiful countryside.
And for being home to many right-wing groups openly hostile to the government of the United States.
At 2:36 on the afternoon of April 1, 1996, one of these groups made its presence known in Spokane.
An employee at a branch office of the local newspaper, "The Spokesman Review," noticed a bomb with a lighted fuse just outside the building's rear door.
As he ran inside to call police, the bomb exploded-- shredding doors, shattering windows, and filling the building with smoke.
As employees fled the building, police rushed to the scene.
They found extensive damage, but no one was injured.
At 2:47, just 11 minutes after "The Spokesman Review" bombing, police got another call.
There had been another explosion.
This time, inside a US Bank branch only 30 blocks away.
Bank surveillance cameras showed two man entering the bank.
Witnesses said a third man waited outside in a getaway van.
The men inside the bank wore parkas and ski masks to hide their identities.
They were heavily armed.
At gunpoint, they ordered tellers to put money in bags.
After that occurred and they got, apparently, the money that they believed was available, one of the robbers left a pipe bomb on the counter of the bank and lit it.
And then told everybody to evacuate the bank that it-- I think the comment was made on the witnesses that they said, It's going to blow.
I think the comment was made on the witnesses that they said, It's going to blow.
It's going to blow.
Or something similar to that.
The bomb, seen in this surveillance shot, exploded.
It tore through the building shattering windows, counters, and doors.
Again, amazingly, no one was hurt.
If the teller had been standing there, she could've been killed or severely injured.
And people inside the bank could have been severely injured from the shrapnel at it flew.
Investigators were now connecting the two bombings.
Since the blasts came so close together, police were convinced the first bomb was a diversion designed to draw attention away from the bank robbery.
It was clearly a well-planned and well-executed crime.
These people really knew what they were doing.
And also, there was no question, when they went inside that bank, these were not amateurs.
They had planned this.
Letters left behind at both bombings left no doubt that they were related.
The letters, which promised more violence, had a symbol at the bottom.
A combination of the letter P and a cross.
It was the symbol of the Phineas Priesthood, a highly-armed, extremely violent, right-wing terrorist group that had declared a Holy War against the United States government.
Two bombings on the same day in Spokane, Washington, left massive damage, and a community that feared there would be more violence to come.
As bomb experts dug through the rubble, they found letters the bombers had purposely left behind.
To experts on domestic terrorism, the letters spoke volumes.
They contained symbols that identified the bombers as members of the Phineas Priesthood.
The priesthood's creed is an unusual combination of biblical prophecy and violence.
A radical right-wing view of America combined with a strictly conservative interpretation of scripture.
The result, a fanatical hatred of government and a rationale for violence.
They want to destroy America to say that they don't believe in reforming America, they believe that the whole system is rotten and needs to be basically torn down so that we can start over again.
David Neiwert studied the Phineas Priesthood for his book "In God's Country."
He says the group takes its name from an Old Testament story about a man named Phineas, who kills an interracial couple.
The essence of the Phineas Priesthood is that people who violate God's laws deserve to be killed.
News that the priesthood had targeted Spokane terrified the city.
And had every one, including law enforcement, preparing for the worst.
This was the most serious crime probably that's ever happened in Spokane, from a danger to the entire community.
Obviously, you have serial murders and a lot of murder cases and so on, but this case had people in fear.
They were terrorized.
Police now knew that name of the group, but not the names of the bombers.
FBI analysts went over images from the bank's surveillance cameras.
The images were shot once every second, making for a disconnected sequence.
But when frozen and enlarged, the individual images were extraordinarily clear.
These pictures were some of the best that I've ever seen in the laboratory because they were high-quality 35 millimeter black and white photographs, and the individual in question was standing so close to the camera that he filled a large part of the frame.
Vorder Bruegge, an FBI photograph analyst, attempted to measure the bomber's height.
He used a process known as perspective analysis, in which the tiles on the bank's floor, the position of the surveillance camera, and the height of the teller counters were all used to measure the dimensions of everything in the image.
Analysts concluded the robber was approximately 5 feet 6-1/2 inches tall.
This information was relayed to officers in Spokane.
But then on July 12, just three months after the first attack, there was another bombing.
This time, the target was this Planned Parenthood clinic.
Witnesses said they saw two men in ponchos throw a lighted pipe bomb in the clinic's front door before driving away.
This particular one was covered with buckshot to produce more shrapnel, apparently in an effort to make it even more deadly or devastating than it-- it would normally have been.
The bomb tore through the clinic and was clearly designed to kill.
Only luck kept it from claiming lives.
Nobody was hurt.
It was unbelievable.
There was nobody there.
Had they been, they would have been hurt.
People inside the Planned Parenthood, there's no question somebody would have been killed because this bomb blew a hole in a 4-inch concrete floor.
Then, just 15 minutes later, the same US Bank branch office robbed on April Fool's Day was hit again.
Almost a carbon-copy of the first robbery and bombing.
After the bomb went off at the Planned Parenthood, van pulls up again at the same US Bank on Sprague Avenue.
Two robbers go in.
One's carrying a 25-pound propane tank, the kind that we use for our barbecues, with something on top.
They're both armed.
As in the first robbery, the men took over the bank and made off with $35,000 in cash.
They left the propane tank bomb on the floor and fled in a white van.
But this bomb, which was rigged with an electric taser detonating device, failed to go off.
A match book, left behind at the Planned Parenthood bombing, contained the priesthood logo.
It cited two biblical passages.
One, Psalm 139 contains the verse, kill the wicked.
A few days later, the bombers sent this letter to Planned Parenthood.
It said, sorry we missed you on July 12.
Will do better next time.
After their branch office in Spokane, Washington, was targeted in two separate bomb attacks, US Bank officials put up a $130,000 reward for any information on members of the Phineas Priesthood, the group that claimed responsibility for the attacks.
US Bank officials put up a $130,000 reward for any information on members of the Phineas Priesthood, the group that claimed responsibility for the attacks.
Meanwhile, analysts examined the pipe bombs that nearly destroyed Spokane's Planned Parenthood clinic.
That bomb caused unbelievable damage to the Planned Parenthood.
The director of Planned Parenthood from New York came out and said this was the worst bombing that had ever happened of a Planned Parenthood clinic.
The bomb was wrapped with buckshot.
This made it more deadly.
But also more identifiable.
Most buckshot is made from recycled car batteries, which makes for a lot of impurities, all of which can be identified.
FBI analyst Kathleen Lundy took shavings from the buckshot found at the bomb site.
These shavings are dissolved in a neutral chemical solution.
This solution is then vaporized at extremely high temperatures.
The rate of vaporization is then fed to a computer, which identifies the buckshot's basic chemical components.
Compared to my years of experience, the buckshot in this case had extremely high levels of these impurities.
And the chemical or elemental makeup of this buckshot was, I'd say, distinctive compared to others that I've analyzed.
If this buckshot could be traced, investigators might get a lead on the bomber's identities.
But then, a solid lead came from informants anxious to receive the reward.
One of the people that the Phineas Priests, or this gang of people, had tried to recruit into their gang decided that he wanted that money and contacted authorities and pointed out the men to them.
The informant identified three men.
Vern Jay Merrell, Robert Berry, and Charles Barbee, all living in Sand Point, Idaho.
The informant had one more piece of information.
The trio was planning their next bank hit for October 8.
The target, a US Bank branch in Portland, Oregon.
The FBI immediately began background checks and surveillance on the three men.
They found that Merrell, 51, trained as a nuclear engineer, left his career and moved to Idaho to devote all his time to the Phineas Priesthood.
Berry, 42, owned a struggling truck repair shop and spent most of his time and money on anti-government activities.
Barbee, 44, had quit his job at AT&T years earlier.
Investigators suspected he might be the bomber in this surveillance image.
Records indicated Barbee was 5 feet 6-5/8 inches tall, fractions away from analysts estimate of the bombers actual height.
On October 8, the men, who were being watched by investigators using long-distance surveillance equipment, loaded their vehicle with automatic rifles and grenade launchers and left for Portland.
Before the trio arrived in Portland, FBI officials called the US Bank branch and told them to lock their doors.
FBI officials called the US Bank branch and told them to lock their doors.
What's going on?
Agents watched as the trio waited outside the bank in their van.
They saw people going up to the doors, shaking the doors, but nobody was getting in.
So the-- the bank got a phone call that said are you open?
And they said, no.
We assume it was from a cell phone inside the vehicle.
Stymied in their plans, the men drove away.
Agents followed them in the air and on the ground.
And when the men stopped for gas in Yakima, Washington, police swooped in for the arrest.
They would have been prepared for anything.
Had we tried to stop them on the highway and they were going to have a shootout, somebody would have died.
There's no doubt in my mind.
Agents searched the suspect's homes.
In Vern Merrell's home, they found a Hewlett Packard inkjet color printer consistent with the one that printed the letter sent to the Planned Parenthood clinic.
In Robert Berry's truck repair business, they found what appeared to be the same buckshot used in the Planned Parenthood bombing.
And in the home of the third suspect, Charles Barbee, investigators found something that the FBI analyst told them to be on the lookout for.
An unusual piece of evidence, a deeply worn pair of blue jeans.
After the arrest of three men in the Spokane bombings and robberies, investigators looked for conclusive evidence to tie them to the crimes.
The buckshot found in Robert Berry's truck repair business was subjected to the same analysis as buckshot attached to the bomb that destroyed Spokane's Planned Parenthood clinic.
Spokane's Planned Parenthood clinic.
Chemically, I couldn't tell the buckshot recovered from the bombing apart from the buckshot recovered from the business.
They were chemically the same.
But prosecutors wanted something even more conclusive.
Was there a way to use the bank surveillance images to clearly identify at least one of the robbers?
Was it possible that these two images, which were particularly clear, were the suspect Charles Barbee?
The robber was covered head to toe, but his blue jeans were clearly identifiable.
Almost all blue jeans are made of white cotton that is then dyed blue.
How that blue dye wears off, particularly on the seams, can be distinctive.
A sort of hill and valley effect is created.
High parts of the seam turn white, while the lower parts retain their color.
The fit of the jeans and the posture of the person wearing them can create unique patterns, almost like a bar code, that appears along these seams.
FBI photograph analyst, Richard Vorder Bruegge had an agent of Barbee's height wear the jeans taken from Charles Barbee's home.
This man was photographed from the same distance and in the same position as the bank surveillance photo of the man thought to be Charles Barbee.
It enables me to get them positioned in a way that most closely approximates what the bank robber's posture was.
It also enables me to try and replicate the draping of the clothing as closely as possible.
In a process called Point-by-Point Analysis, the photos are broken down into sections.
And each section is analyzed for distinctive features.
Then, the two sets of photos, though showing the jeans worn by the bank robber and those taken from the suspect's home, are compared.
The analysis showed more than 30 areas where the jeans were identical.
Near the number 5, it is clear the actual seam of the jeans breaks and is folded over.
This is clear in both sets of photos.
At number 7, ridges can be seen extending above the hemline.
But at the point where the seam meets the hemline, the jeans lose all their color and go completely white.
This is also consistent in both photos.
Finally, at the number 2, you can see wear lines shooting off to the left above the hemline.
And at the hem, a sort of H pattern is created.
It's an H with a broad right side, and a thin left side.
The same H pattern can be seen in jeans taken from Charles Barbee's home.
In this case because I was able to positively identify those pants, I could get on the stand and say, those pants were the ones worn by the bank robber.
I can't tell you who the bank robber was.
And so it's very strong circumstantial evidence.
Barbee couldn't have known it, but the jeans he wore during the first bank robbery helped identify him and his fellow bombers.
In March of 1997, the trio went on trial.
Over 500 items were entered into evidence, but the proceedings resulted in a mistrial.
It was later found that one of the jurors was sympathetic to the Phineas Priesthood's anti-government beliefs.
But at the second trial three months later, the jury returned guilty verdicts.
And Vern Merrell, Charles Barbee, and Robert Berry were given mandatory life terms.
They claimed to the end that the trial was political, but investigators disagreed.
And to prove it, they were able to present a well-worn pair of blue jeans.
The same pair of blue jeans that were worn during the bank robbery.
I thought the FBI lab did an excellent job by being able to come up and compare those to the photograph and identify them positively as the jeans the bank robber wore.
And that's the only time I ever know it to have been done.
It may have done on another case someplace, but I'm not aware of it.
That was pretty amazing.
They were basically robbers.
They wanted the money.
They're criminals.
They didn't believe in our government, that's true.
They didn't believe in abortion, and that's true.
They didn't believe in banks, that's true.
But they're common criminals.
They did these to get money.
A small Canadian farm town made national news when a woman claimed she was raped by her own doctor.
DNA tests proved the doctor was innocent.
The victim insisted the DNA test was wrong.
What does a high school graduate know that the world's top scientists do not?
Nestled along Canada's beautiful southwestern prairie is the tiny town of Kipling, Saskatchewan.
The population is so sparse, the farm animals outnumber the residents.
In a town this size, everyone knows one another.
It's a fairly quiet farming community with little crime.
We may have up to five or six sexual assaults a year and break and enters, but fairly small in the scope of criminal cold work.
This is the story of one of those alleged sexual assault cases.
It took place on Halloween night in 1992.
Depending on whose story you believe, it was either a night of lies and trickery, or an unfortunate misunderstanding.
A woman we'll call Candy, was working at this gas station.
Her boyfriend stopped by.
They got into an argument.
No, I am not dealing with you anymore!
I can't even stand to look at you!
Candy drove to see her girlfriend who worked at the Kipling Memorial Union Hospital.
She wasn't there.
Candy appeared upset.
A nurse suggested she see a doctor.
Dr. John Schneeberger was on call that night.
He was also Candy's doctor, and had even delivered her baby.
Candy says Dr. Schneeberger recommended a sedative.
I wasn't really hysterical anymore.
But what I told him was that I was so mad at Danny, that I felt like killing him.
But I didn't actually mean that I was going to go out and kill him.
I was just describing how angry I was.
I had just expected that he would give me a couple pills or something just to relax my muscles, calm me down.
Instead, Dr. Schneeberger gave Candy a shot.
She says she went numb almost immediately.
I had no control over my muscles.
It's like all my muscles left, and I was just this piece of jelly falling over.
I tried to scream.
As I was falling over, nothing would come out except for a croaking noise that a frog would make.
It was just-- it was so scary.
Candy isn't exactly sure what happened next, but believes she was raped.
When a dentist freezes your gums, you can't-- and he's pulling your tooth out, you can't feel the pain from the tooth, but what you can feel is pressure of the tooth moving back and forth.
And that's the only way I can describe it.
When she regained consciousness alone in the exam room, Candy had the presence of mind to place her underwear in an airtight bag.
Candy was too dizzy to leave the hospital.
The nurses insisted she spend the night.
She said nothing of the alleged rape.
The next day, she confronted Dr. Schneeberger.
I said, what the hell was that drug you gave me last night?
And he asked me, why?
Did it give you wild dreams?
And then-- and then I knew that, oh, my God.
I was going to have a hell of a fight on my hands, because here now he's already-- already covering up.
When Candy was released from the hospital, she spoke briefly with her parents and told them of her suspicions.
You could tell by the look on her face that something terrible had happened to her, eh?
I was really hoping it wasn't true, eh?
But when we saw her, we knew it was.
She then drove to Regina, a town 2 hours drive away, and went to a rape clinic for testing.
There they found evidence of semen on her panties, jeans, and on a vaginal swab.
That was part of my reasoning for going for the rape kit-- to find out if this really did happen, or am I going nuts?
Did my mind play some tricks on me?
Or what the hell is going on here?
Blood tests also revealed an unusual drug in Candy's system, a drug called Versed.
They use it as a preanesthetic agent to induce anesthesia.
You start to go numb and not feel the power of your muscles, or able to use your muscles.
And then you become very tired, and then asleep.
When Candy formally accused Dr. Schneeberger of rape, many residents of Kipling believed Candy was lying.
Dr. Schneeberger of rape, many residents of Kipling believed Candy was lying.
Dr. Schneeberger was a respected member of the community.
He had never been accused of anything like this before.
Some believed Candy, as a single mother, was either romantically interested in the married doctor, or her motive was to get some sort of financial settlement to end the controversy.
The town looked up to the doctor.
He was a good doctor.
And he would never do anything like that.
It was impossible.
Also suspicious, was the fact that Candy had said nothing to hospital nurses on the night of the alleged rape.
There were two nurses on shift that night.
In fact, both of them were in that room, the room that the rape allegedly occurred in, very shortly after.
They saw nothing amiss.
To end the controversy, Dr. Schneeberger willingly agreed to give blood for a DNA test.
Dr. Schneeberger willingly agreed to give blood for a DNA test.
The DNA in the blood drawn from Dr. Schneeberger did not match the biological material from Candy's rape test kit.
And I was in shock again.
And I said, no.
That's impossible!
That's impossible.
How can this be?
7 more years would go by before that question was finally answered.
When DNA tests showed the Dr. Schneeberger was innocent of the sexual assault on his 20-year-old patient, most people in Kipling tried to put the whole thing behind them.
But Candy, the alleged victim, would not let the issue die.
All during the next year, she insisted that someone, somehow, had tampered with the first DNA test at the hospital.
So Dr. Schneeberger agreed to a second DNA test in August of 1993.
His blood was drawn by a registered nurse.
The test was monitored by the police.
And the vials were taken directly to the forensic laboratory at police headquarters.
They watched the needle actually penetrate the doctor's arm.
Once again, Dr. Schneeberger's DNA did not match the DNA on Candy's clothing or the rape test kit.
Of course I didn't believe them.
A lot of other people did believe them.
And I guess it's hard.
You've got-- DNA is the new thing.
And it's supposed to be so right and so perfect.
We knew there was something wrong.
We totally believed her, eh?
And we knew he was up to something.
Dr. Schneeberger defended himself by saying the drug he injected into Candy that night in the hospital, Versed, can cause erotic hallucinations.
Versed can account for all sorts of hallucinations, possibly.
But it can't produce semen.
And according to the complainant, the last time she had had intercourse was weeks before this incident.
With no other evidence, in 1994, the police closed their investigation into this matter.
The doctor has already given two samples.
And those two samples were tested.
And they came up as being-- having a DNA profile.
And the profile didn't match the semen that was left at the scene.
So now we're stuck, where we really can't do anything.
The town of Kipling was not kind at all to Candy.
She hired a private investigator who broke into Dr. Schneeberger's car.
On the headrest, he found strands of hair, but there were no roots attached.
So they couldn't be used for DNA testing.
Also in the car, was a tube of lip balm, presumably used by Dr. Schneeberger.
At her own expense, Candy asked a private lab to test the epithelial cells on the end of the lip balm.
Those epithelial cells would contain enough DNA for testing.
And when they did, Candy finally got her first piece of positive news.
The DNA from the lip balm matched the DNA from Candy's rape test kit.
I knew it all along.
It wasn't a shock that something was going to match.
But it was a bit of a relief, because at least we had that to prove to the police.
But there were two problems.
First, there was no proof that the cells were Dr.
Schneeberger's.
Second, the evidence couldn't be used in court, since the investigator broke into the car without a warrant.
But if the cells on the lip balm were those of Dr. Schneeberger, why did the DNA from his lips differ from his blood sample?
To find out, Candy filed a civil suit against Dr. Schneeberger and brought charges against him with the local medical society.
At the hearing, Candy sat directly across from Dr.
Schneeberger's wife.
If looks could kill, I would've been dead.
Lisa was sitting across the table from me.
And she just sat there with her arms crossed, just glaring at me, like, you little bitch.
You are ruining our lives.
And I just sat in my chair thinking, oh, my God.
You're so stupid.
You know? [laughs] You are so stupid.
And if you don't watch it, it's going to happen to your kids All of this pressure prompted Dr. Schneeberger to agree to yet another DNA test.
All of this pressure prompted Dr. Schneeberger to agree to yet another DNA test.
Dr. Schneeberger to agree to yet another DNA test.
This time, the procedure was videotaped by police and performed at their forensics lab.
The doctor appears friendly and helpful.
The technician wants to take blood from his finger, but the doctor politely refuses, saying he has a disease that would cause his hands to bruise.
That's how we usually take the sample.
We don't need much blood.
Since this is a voluntary test, the doctor can't be forced to do anything against his will.
So the technician inserts a needle into his left arm Nothing comes out.
Nothing comes out.
The vein was larger, or appeared much larger than I would have expected.
And I thought that was a little unusual.
She tries another tube, but still has trouble.
Sometimes the vacuum is poor, and then it would not pull the blood out of the individual's arm.
Eventually, she was able to extract a sample.
Afterwards, the nurse was puzzled.
And the lab determined that the sample was too degraded for DNA testing.
Police broke the news to Candy.
And I'm like, oh, my God.
Whatever.
Like, that's bull [bleep].
This is our last chance to get blood from him.
And you guys screwed up again.
Even the police were suspicious when DNA from Dr. Schneeberger's lip balm matched the DNA from Candy's rape test kit.
But since Dr. Schneeberger had passed two prior blood DNA tests, officials were hesitant to charge him.
Because of his submitting voluntarily to a DNA sample, it gave him the out that, it wasn't me.
Here's a DNA sample showing it is not.
The only person who had an opportunity, limited as it was, was her doctor.
But we believed in the DNA testing.
I mean, we believed in the science of DNA.
They had to follow the rules of the Canadian justice system.
I call it the Canadian criminal system, [laughs] because that's basically what it is.
It's the criminals that have all the rights.
On April 25, 1997, 5 years after the alleged rape, police got a break.
Startling new information was discovered inside the doctor's own home.
Schneeberger's stepdaughter, his wife's biological child, claimed that the doctor assaulted her too.
For several years, the youngster says her stepfather had been coming into her room at night, and giving her injections.
His wife discovered a box full of condoms, needles, and drugs, including Versed, in the doctor's home office.
I blame myself.
I still blame myself.
I screamed.
I bawled.
I was pretty disgusted, because all of these years, I mean, I'm fighting to get the truth out, but also to make sure that it didn't happen to anybody else.
I mean, I'm fighting to get the truth out, but also to make sure that it didn't happen to anybody else.
Dr. John Schneeberger was arrested and ordered to undergo yet another DNA test.
Again, the procedure was videotaped.
I also advised you that we have a warrant to obtain bodily substances for the purpose of-- The doctor was withdrawn and silent.
The doctor was withdrawn and silent.
Police took several samples-- hair, saliva, then blood-- taken from his finger, not his arm.
And this time a surprise-- DNA from all three samples matched DNA found on Candy's vaginal swab.
Oh, that was wonderful.
That was what I had wanted all along.
I mean, I had even offered to go chop an arm off.
I would have socked him one in the nose to get that blood-- no problem.
It was quite a happy day, because we knew we knew we had him, that Candy was right.
And everybody else who didn't believe her was wrong.
But a big question remained unanswered.
How did Dr. Schneeberger fool the previous blood DNA tests?
It was a puzzle how those samples had come to be different than the last finger.
Even if we knew there was something different, there was no way that we could prove anything.
Especially since the nurses and police all witnessed the needle being inserted into Dr. Schneeberger's arm while the blood was drawn.
On the stand, Dr. Schneeberger would reveal his secret.
In November of 1999, Dr. John Schneeberger went on trial in Saskatchewan for the rape of this patient, Candy, and his own stepdaughter.
On the witness stand, he said he surgically inserted a plastic tube under the skin into his left arm, filled with blood from one of his patients.
This is why he insisted that the blood be drawn from his left arm rather than anywhere else.
If you look closely at the videotape of that blood test, you'll see that the doctor is careful to pull his sleeve only so high, so as not to reveal the incision where he inserted the tube.
And for a brief moment, you can see the tube protruding from his arm.
But by the time the third test was done, 5 years after the rape accusation, the blood in the tube was old and dark, which explains why the technician was suspicious.
Doctor Schneeberger, however, denied raping Candy.
He claims Candy broke into his home, stole a used condom, and used that biological sample to frame him.
He said he used his patient's blood for the DNA test, because he had no other way to defend himself.
When that came up at trial that he thought Candy broke into his house and stole samples, or whatever.
It was laughable.
It was absolutely laughable that he had to grasp at straws like that.
It was just laughable.
I was a bulldog on the stand.
I kicked his lawyer's ass.
And he's supposed to be the best lawyer in southern Saskatchewan, best defense lawyer.
I showed who was boss.
When you run across strong willed individuals, sometimes the strong willed individuals are right.
And sometimes they're wrong.
And this particular strong willed person was right.
And she was right all along.
And she was determined to see that what happened to her didn't happen to anyone else.
This would be right up around the top as far as being the most bizarre and most involved, and involving all the forensic evidence here, of any case that I had.
Dr. Schneeberger was found guilty of sexually assaulting Candy, as well as drugging her, and obstructing justice.
He was also convicted of sexually assaulting his stepdaughter, and was sentenced to 6 years in prison.
I'm so proud of Candy.
If it was me, I don't know if I could handle the whole-- everything that she went through.
It was just-- when the test came back negative, and she had to fight, and it was just a constant battle.
While taping this interview, Candy received a telephone call in which she learned Dr. Schneeberger had been denied parole.
Candy received a telephone call in which she learned Dr. Schneeberger had been denied parole.
I won again!
He lost both of his chances to get out for day parole and full parole.
Oh my, God!
Isn't that great?
But they didn't.
They didn't.
They're smarter than the rest!
Oh, my God.
Do you guys know how exciting this is for me?
It's like celebration.
You have to remember that the DNA also lead us off the path.
So when I lecture on this particular case to younger police officers, I say to them, remember the DNA does give you something, but it has to be supported with cooperative evidence.
It was very frustrating not being able to have all the answers, but it finally did come together after 7 years and 24 days.
An elderly woman was found dead in her hotel room.
Was it a natural death, or was it murder?
An alert doctor noticed a horrible infection on the finger of a hotel worker who had come to the emergency room for treatment of his injury.
The virulence of that infection was a clue to the mystery.
Cincinnati, the third largest city in Ohio.
It was named after the Roman statesman Lucius Cincinnatus, whom legend held to be the model of virtue.
But in September of 1994, Rhoda Nathan, a 67-year-old grandmother visiting Cincinnati, saw a different side of the city.
She was such an up person that you could not avoid having a good time with her.
She was just a terrific lady.
She checked into this hotel in the Cincinnati suburb of Blue Ash.
It's a pretty nice hotel.
It does a pretty good convention business.
And nothing like this had ever happened there before.
Rhoda was sharing room 237 with their best friend of 50 years, Elaine Schub, and Elaine's boyfriend, Joe Kaplan, both visiting from Florida.
Kaplan, both visiting from Florida.
They were all there to attend Elaine's grandson's bar On Saturday morning, Joe and Elaine woke early and left the room for breakfast at 7:30.
On Saturday morning, Joe and Elaine woke early and left the room for breakfast at 7:30.
Joe said he pulled the door shut, making sure it was locked.
Rhoda stayed behind so she could shower and dress with some privacy.
After breakfast a half hour later, Elaine and Joe returned to the room.
Elaine and Joe returned to the room.
I opened the door and I was just shocked I saw Rhoda's body.
She was completely nude, head was on the side.
Golly, it looked a little purple to me.
Rhoda was barely recognizable.
I thought it was someone was wasn't a Caucasian.
Her face was very brown.
To me, it looked like there was blood splattered inside or blood vessels burst, I don't know what.
But I just didn't think it was Rhoda.
I need help!
Two hotel guests, a cardiologist and a registered nurse, answered the couple's cries for help and immediately performed CPR, believing Rhoda had suffered a heart attack and fallen.
Rhoda was rushed to hospital, but was too late.
She was pronounced dead on arrival.
Later that day, Elaine discovered $500 in cash missing from the purse she had left in the room while at breakfast.
There was $500 in here. And it's all gone now.
It was then Elaine also realized that Rhoda's necklace was missing from her neck.
I remember looking at her and saying, oh my god.
I I I saw her breast and I just knew-- I didn't think in my mind, oh, where's her necklace.
I didn't think in my mind, oh, where's her necklace.
But I know it wasn't there.
Police closed room 237 as a crime scene.
This was one of the most heinous crimes that I've ever seen in my 25 plus years in law enforcement.
Bruises on Rhoda's face and chest indicated she had been beaten with at least two different objects in addition to someone's fists.
She died of a severe beating.
She, uh, she was just beaten to death.
That's the simplest way to put it.
The autopsy confirmed what police already suspected.
Rhoda's death was a homicide.
I think it's a horrible thing for this community to have out of town visitors come in here and be brutalized in the nature that she was.
And hopefully we can bring some justice to this situation.
And, uh, we think the death penalty is an appropriate piece of justice.
A 67-year-old grandmother, Rhoda Nathan, was murdered in her hotel room just hours before she was to attend a bar mitzvah.
Since there were no signs of forced entry, Rhoda may have known the killer and willingly opened the door.
Rhoda may have known the killer and willingly opened the door.
But since she was found naked, and still wet from her shower, this theory was abandoned.
A large blood stain was on the window curtain.
And a bloody footprint was found on the bathroom floor.
It was dreadful.
It was like losing a member of the family.
She did nothing wrong.
She was going for a good time.
And she was in the wrong place at the wrong time.
The motive appeared to be robbery.
Rhoda's gold and diamond necklace was missing, along with $500 in cash from Elaine's purse.
The door to room 237 faced the hotel lobby atrium.
But no one was seen entering the room.
We knew that whoever did this had to be at the hotel that morning between 7:30 and 8:00.
So it really limited the suspect pool, and that was a big circumstance.
Investigators questioned hotel guests and employees, since they would have access to room keys.
The death of Rhoda Nathan wasn't the only incident at the hotel that day.
42-year-old Elwood Butch Jones, a hotel handyman had sliced his left hand on the end of a trash dumpster.
He checked into work maybe around 6 o'clock that morning.
And a couple people had seen him, didn't seem like he had any physical problems.
Yet around 8:30 or 9 o'clock, people noticed that he had his left hand wrapped.
Three days later, Jones went to the hospital emergency room for treatment of his left index finger, which had become severely infected.
Jones was seen by hand surgeon Dr. John McDonough.
It was pretty benign as far as the cut.
It was a small cut, already partially healed.
And I initially took him at his word, that he had indeed cut it on a dumpster at work.
When Dr. McDonough cut into Jones's finger, infected tissue squirted 10 inches across the operating room table.
The cut was deep, penetrating the capsule or sterile lining of Jones's finger joint.
Jones underwent two different operations, antibiotic therapy, and a five day hospital stay.
Doctors believe that Jones could have died had he not sought treatment.
And Dr. McDonough suspected that his hand injury was not caused by a cut from a metal object.
Lab tests revealed that the cause of the infection was a virulent bacteria called eikenella corrodens.
Eikenella is found typically in the human mouth, under dental plaque, around the gum line.
To get the eikenella to, um, propagate, you have to break the dental plaque.
There has to be a significant injury.
And that happens when you break a tooth, usually, or a hard object comes in contact with it, such as a fist or a hand bone.
So just putting his hand in his mouth would not have given him eikenella.
Coincidentally, two of Rhoda Nathan's teeth had been knocked out during the attack.
One two was found on the floor next to her body, the other, in her stomach.
Also suspicious, Elwood Jones told doctors that he cut his hand on the trash dumpster.
But later, he told coworkers he cut it on some metal stairs.
So it was obvious that he was concerned about how he had done this injury to his hand.
Even though Elwood was intelligent, he was too dumb to keep his story straight.
If you did not kill Rhoda Nathan, then who do you suppose did?
I, I, I'm not guilty.
That's all I can say.
Who do you suppose set you up?
It was one of the most brutal murder cases that I've ever heard of, just the sheer viciousness of the beating and the shear senselessness of it just amaze me.
The first lead in Rhoda Nathan's murder came when a handyman, Elwood Jones, who worked in the same hotel, suffered a serious hand injury on the same day of the murder.
At first, police weren't overly suspicious until they learned that Jones had given co-workers one explanation of the accident, but told hospital employees another.
This prompted investigators to interview Jones' surgeon, Dr. McDonough.
Jones' surgeon, Dr. McDonough.
Well, they wanted me give them some information about Mr. Jones.
And I told them, I was sorry that Mr. Jones and I had a, um, doctor-patient relationship.
And there was an ethical problem with, uh, me even talking to them about him in any way.
The Ohio Supreme Court had already ruled that the patient-physician privilege of confidentiality is negated when police have reasonable cause to believe that an injury resulted from violence related to a crime.
Several days later, they came back with the court orders and information that as a physician under the laws of the state of Ohio, I was required to give testimony about a case of this nature.
Dr. McDonough said at first he took Jones's word that he had cut his hand on a dumpster.
But after looking at the wound more closely, Dr. McDonough knew that Jones was lying.
Dr. McDonough knew that Jones was lying.
He recognized the wound as a human bite injury, which hand specialists call a fight bite.
It happens when a clenched fist comes into contact with teeth.
Well, our definition of a fight bite is an injury to the hand, usually over any one of the knuckles, when someone strikes someone in the mouth during an argument.
Um, what happens is the skin is penetrated by the edge of the tooth, or the tooth may actually break off.
And that sharp edge will then inoculate bacteria underneath the skin into the soft tissues of the hand.
I've been doing hand surgery for about 25 years now.
And I've only seen it three times.
And every time I saw it, it was involved in a human bite injury involved in a fight.
The location of the cut on Jones's knuckle pointed to this conclusion, as did the lab tests which found the human mouth bacteria eikenella corrodens.
Hitting somebody in the mouth and cutting your hand is pretty akin to cutting your hand on the bottom of the sewer.
Dr. McDonough found Jones' injury to be so unusual, he took these photographs to show his medical students.
Those photographs became a critical piece of evidence.
It was truly a case of serendipity.
Because at that point in time, we did not know the circumstances of Mr. Jones's injury.
And what we thought was going to be a nice demonstration for a lecture turned out to be quite a bit more than that.
Further investigation into Jones's whereabouts on the day of Rhoda's murder revealed he had signed out a master passkey that morning and never returned it.
Elwood Jones also had a prior criminal history, three convictions for burglary and theft.
With a search warrant, investigators searched both Jones's home and that of his girlfriend and coworker , Erline Metcalfe.
Jones's home and that of his girlfriend and coworker , Erline Metcalfe.
Erline Metcalfe.
Investigators examined Elwood Jones's clothes and shoes.
The shoes did not match the bloody footprint found at the crime scene.
And tests on his clothes found no trace of Rhoda Nathan's blood.
In Jones's automobiles was a tool kit, and a master passkey from the hotel, two sets of door chains, along with a gold and diamond pendant, similar to the one Rhoda Nathan was seen wearing before her death.
Investigators suspected that the marks on Rhoda's face may have been made by a door chain, like the one found in Jones's trunk.
And the mark on her chest might have been caused by a walkie talkie radio, similar to the one Jones used at the hotel.
Jones used at the hotel.
But the autopsy photographs were not taken exactly parallel to the victim's body, creating a slight angular distortion.
An accurate photographic comparison of the wounds to these items would be impossible.
It wasn't quick.
It wasn't painless.
I'm sure she lay on the floor for quite a while, hoping her friends would come back and she didn't die right away.
The brutal murder of Rhoda Nathan was a terrible shock to her son, and to all who knew and loved her.
She was vibrant.
She was up.
She was an optimist.
She was-- she had a great sense of humor.
She was most proud about her kids, which is, I guess, what most of us try to be proud of.
She had two lovely sons, and they've done very nicely.
Nice family, nice grandchild, nice people.
Before going on trial, investigators wanted to know if any of the items in Jones's toolbox had been used in the assault.
But investigators had a problem.
Distortions in the autopsy photos made it difficult to analyze the patterns of Rhoda's injuries.
But police learned that the FBI had recently developed a new technology to correct prospective distortions in photographs, called photo-rectification.
The machine's adjustable table is first positioned to mirror the camera angle at the time the original photo was taken.
The table is then moved to transform the plane on the photograph to a flat surface plane as viewed from directly overhead.
So this machine had the ability to actually rectify or to correct the imperfection in the way the photograph was taken.
Next, investigators took the rectified photos to the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology.
The pathologists there are experts in the study of injuries caused by weapons.
The color of the autopsy photographs were altered, along with the brightness and contrast, to distinguish the injuries from marks caused by internal bleeding.
It was then that marks on Rhoda's face matched the door chain in Jones's toolkit.
Experts could not exclude Jones's walkie talkie as the cause of Rhoda's chest bruise.
Although, it did not correspond exactly.
They did not have DNA.
They did not have blood evidence or hair samples or fibers.
But they did have this rather unusual technique of showing how the radio may have matched up to the bruising.
Prosecutors believe that when Elaine and Joe left their hotel room for breakfast, Jones was watching and thought the room was empty.
He took his tool kit and the door chain so he could say he was doing some room maintenance, in case the couple came back early.
Jones used the master passkey he signed out earlier that morning.
Inside, he took the $500 in cash from the pocketbook.
Then, Rhoda Nathan emerged from the bathroom, still wet from her shower.
He struck Mrs. Nathan in the face with the door chain in his hand, and struck her on the chest with his walkie talkie.
He also struck Rhoda in the mouth with his fist, removing two teeth, and picking up the virulent bacteria which caused the infection.
Before leaving, Jones took the diamond necklace from Rhoda's neck and left.
She may have even been alive and conscious when the one thing that meant the most of her, that she never took off, was snatched off her neck.
That's the kind of guy Elwood Jones is.
To him, it was a little trinket.
To her, it was the main connection to her family, to her husband, to her whole background.
The necklace found in Jones's toolbox was positively identified as belonging to Rhoda Nathan.
Unbeknownst to Elwood Jones, this was a one of a kind piece of jewelry.
In fact, the victim in this case, her husband had it specially made for her from his own mother's wedding There was five small diamonds that were made in a very unique pendant.
There was five small diamonds that were made in a very unique pendant.
And it was so special to her, even if she was taking a shower, even if she was swimming, even if she was sleeping, this pendant never, ever left her neck.
Dr. McDonough testified that Jones's hand injury and the eikenella corrodens bacteria were the result of Jones' fist coming into contact with human teeth, and not on a metal dumpster as Jones claimed.
There was a lot of argument about how that bite could have, or how that injury could have been infected.
Um, but the doctor was very compelling in court when he said there is no other way it could have been infected, other than from a human mouth.
And that proved, uh, very compelling to the jury, I'm sure.
I'm sure.
But of all the hospitals in the city and of all the doctors, the one guy that Elwood Jones ended up just by circumstance being assigned to that night was Dr. McDonough.
And that's, uh, again, I can't say I feel sorry for Elwood.
But I'm convinced, had he gone to any other doctor, this case wouldn't have been solved.
The enhanced photographs of Rhoda's injuries suggested Elwood Jones' walkie talkie and the door chain from his tool box were the most likely items used in the attack.
I'm still not guilty.
Elwood Jones said he was framed by police, whom he claimed had planted Rhoda's necklace in his tool box.
His contention was that he did nothing wrong.
And he was just doing his job that day.
And, uh, they picked him out simply because he had a record.
The jury deliberated just 10 hours.
Elwood Jones was found guilty of aggravated murder, aggravated burglary, and aggravated robbery.
Again, I said I was innocent.
And I'm still innocent.
I did not commit this crim.e Elwood's an asshole.
Elwood's an asshole.
I mean, I don't know if I'm allowed to say that or not, but-- you know, I've tried serial killers that don't bother me as much as Elwood Jones.
He was just an arrogant, he was nasty to his attorney.
He's just a nasty individual.
Based upon our review, the court finds itself in complete, absolute agreement with the recommendation of the jury.
Elwood Jones was sentenced to death.
Outside the courtroom, Elwood Jones's sister reacted angrily to the sentence.
What happened in the court today, it is crazy.
The blue-ass police department framed my brother.
The prosecutor, the judge, and everybody needs to be looked at in this case.
This case was interesting for a lot of reasons, and not just because it happened in a place where you normally don't have this kind of violence.
Um, that, uh, made it more shocking maybe, but the most interesting things about this case were some of the scientific evidence that came into play, some of the forensic evidence that they found.
Um, it was not the kind of evidence you see in a lot of cases.
I'd like to tell him to start making peace with his maker.
Because I think in the very near future, he's going to meet his maker.
And he's going to pay for the vicious murder that he committed.
I'd like to pull the switch.
What would I say to him?
I'd say, I hope you die slowly and painfully.
In 1998, Achim Marino came forward and confessed to the rape and murder of a restaurant worker.
I did this awful crime.
And I was alone.
But this man, Chris Ochoa, had already confessed to that crime and was serving a life sentence.
I pleaded guilty and confessed.
One of them was lying.
To find out who and why, scientists look once more at the forensic evidence.
Austin, Texas, the state's capital city.
20-year-old Nancy DePriest lived here with her husband Todd and 15-month-old daughter, Sylvia.
She was so very friendly and, and very open, uh, to anyone.
She, she just, she just loved people.
She was just, like, a people person.
Nancy was a waitress at a Pizza Hut restaurant.
On October 24, 1988, she arrived for work at 7:00 AM.
Her job was to get the pizza dough ready, for lunch, before the rest of the employees arrived.
The manager of the restaurant called several times that morning to make sure everything was all right.
But there was no answer.
When he stopped by the restaurant around 9:30, he found Nancy slumped under the bathroom sink, nude and barely alive.
She had been shot in the back of the head.
Nancy was rushed to the nearest hospital.
My son-in-law said, "Mom, there's, there's been a robbery.
He broke down.
Nancy died later that day without regaining consciousness.
I began to scream.
I, I was, I was totally hysterical.
The murder occurred before the restaurant opened.
So there were no witnesses to the crime.
The Austin Police Department found no signs of forced entry at the restaurant.
The motive appeared to be robbery since money was missing from the safe.
On the floor of the bathroom, police found a .22 caliber shell casing from the murder weapon.
And Nancy's autopsy revealed she had been sexually assaulted.
Two weeks later, investigators got their first break in the case.
Two employees from another Pizza Hut restaurant, 22-year-old Chris Ochoa and 19-year-old Richard Danziger, went to the restaurant where Nancy had been murdered.
22-year-old Chris Ochoa and 19-year-old Richard Danziger, went to the restaurant where Nancy had been murdered.
So we order a beer.
And he toasted to the memory of Nancy.
To Nancy DePriest.
We won't forget you.
To me, I found it kind of strange.
Nancy's co-workers quickly informed authorities.
Ochoa and Danziger who were later questioned by police.
And he started grilling me about what I know about this murder and this rape.
I know about this murder and this rape.
We went round and round for a couple hours.
I don't recall how many hours.
But he said, at one point, he said, "You know what?
We know you're not capable of this.
Detective Hector Polanco, at the time a 12-year veteran of the force, took over the interrogation.
At one point, he showed me pictures of death row.
He showed them to me.
Richard Danziger and his girlfriend, Donna Angstadt, were also questioned.
They were absolutely horrible to me.
One time, Hector, Hector Polanco pounded his fist on the table.
And I thought he was coming across to grab me.
I came up out of my chair and hit the wall behind me.
It scared me so bad.
Donna said she and Richard were together, in Donna's apartment, at the time of the murder.
I took a lie detector test.
And they told me I flunked it.
Two days later, Chris Ochoa confessed to the rape and murder of Nancy DePriest.
I did it.
I pleaded guilty.
And it was, I can't describe it.
He also revealed that his friend, Richard Danziger, was his accomplice.
Ochoa said he and Danziger entered the restaurant with keys the two had obtained.
They found Nancy alone preparing pizza dough.
After ordering her to remove the money from the safe, Ochoa said he and Danziger bound, gagged, raped, and shot her.
Ochoa said he and Danziger bound, gagged, raped, and shot her.
Ochoa said he was the one who pulled the trigger.
When the DNA results came back from the lab, police had even more proof that Ochoa and Danziger were the killers.
Chris Ochoa not only confessed to the rape and murder of Nancy DePriest, he became the state's star witness against his friend and co-worker Richard Danziger.
DePriest, he became the state's star witness against his friend and co-worker Richard Danziger.
Nancy's family was relieved that the case was concluded quickly.
Not so much satisfaction, I didn't, I didn't feel that.
I didn't, I didn't feel that.
I guess relief that they weren't going to be able to do it to someone else.
Bolstering Ochoa's confession was the DNA evidence.
A blood sample, from Chris Ochoa, matched the DNA from semen on the victim's vaginal swab.
I examined a vaginal swab specimen from Nancy DePriest.
DNA was extracted from spermatozoa on that swab.
And then, DNA typing was done using a single gene that we had available at that point and time.
And the result was obtained from that gene that was, actually, compatible with Chris Ochoa and about 10% to 16% of the population.
10% to 16% of the population.
Statistically, there were 3 million other Texans who might have shared the same genetic marker.
But this wasn't the only forensic evidence.
A brown hair, found in the restaurant bathroom, was microscopically similar to Danziger's.
Richard Danziger plead not guilty and insisted he was innocent.
But the strength of Ochoa's confession and the forensic evidence were too great.
The jury deliberated just 7 and 1/2 minutes and found Richard Danziger guilty of aggravated sexual assault. He was sentenced to life in prison.
In return for his testimony, Chris Ochoa avoided the death penalty.
But he was sentenced to life in prison.
There were nights that I would sit in my bed, crying to God, I was, I would ask Him, "I'm tired, God.
I was, I would ask Him, "I'm tired, God.
I was very tired.
And at some point, I wanted to end it all.
Life in prison was even harder for Richard Danziger.
After three years behind bars, Danziger was assaulted by another inmate, who mistook him for someone else.
Danziger was kicked in the head with steel-tipped boots.
He survived but suffered permanent brain damage.
It's just what's happened to him is horrible.
He's going to need care for the rest of his life.
But the story doesn't end there.
Eight years later, Austin police received a letter from Achim Marino, who was serving three life sentences, in another Texas prison, for a string of robberies and sexual assaults.
Marino claimed that he was the one who raped and murdered Nancy DePriest.
Marino claimed he had undergone a spiritual awakening, while incarcerated, and wanted to set the record straight.
I did this awful crime.
And I was alone.
Marino said the El Paso Police Department had the gun he used to kill Nancy DePriest.
Police Department had the gun he used to kill Nancy DePriest.
They had taken it when he was arrested on an assault charge.
Homicide Detective Manuel Fuentes was assigned to investigate Marino's story.
I got a call from the El Paso Police Department.
And the detective there said, "You're not going to believe this.
But that gun is, hasn't been destroyed.
Scientists compared Marino's .22 caliber handgun to the bullet removed from Nancy DePriest.
The ballistic examination did not reveal a match.
It appeared there wasn't much more to investigate.
Two years later, Achim Marino tried once again.
I want to thank Speaker Laney for your friendship-- This time, he sent a letter to then Governor George W. Bush with a copy to the prosecutor's office.
This time, he sent a letter to then Governor George W. Bush with a copy to the prosecutor's office.
I told him that basically the same thing, that I had, uh, that, that I had committed a murder in '88 at the Pizza Hut, and that, uh, there was two innocent men, who I did not know, locked up for it.
This time, Detective Fuentes visited Chris Ochoa in prison.
Once again, Ochoa repeated what he had been saying for 10 years, that he and Danziger had acted alone.
And I told him, "Oh, yeah, yeah.
You're right.
I said, "You know what?
And he said as far as he knew, there wasn't a third person involved.
It was just him and Richard that killed Nancy DePriest.
So there was little more authorities could do, especially since Ochoa's DNA matched semen found at the crime scene.
It would take one more year before one of these men finally changed his story.
For almost 11 years, Chris Ochoa continued to maintain that he and Richard Danziger were responsible for the rape and murder of Nancy DePriest.
But one year after Achim Marino wrote a letter to the governor's office saying he murdered Nancy DePriest, Chris Ochoa changed his story.
Chris Ochoa changed his story.
Did you kill Nancy DePriest?
Uh, no, ma'am.
Just tell me you did it.
Look me in the face and tell me you did it.
Ochoa now claimed that his confession had been coerced.
He said he was physically assaulted, threatened, and denied access to an attorney during police questioning.
And a female detective and Hispanic detective, she And I asked her, you know, uh, "Can I have an attorney?"
And she got real upset and said, "You can't have one until you're officially charged."
In search for help, Ochoa contacted the Wisconsin Innocence Project, a group that investigates cases in which they believe an innocent person has been wrongfully convicted.
Innocence Project, a group that investigates cases in which they believe an innocent person has been wrongfully convicted.
And I told them, "Please help me.
You know, I think one of the, my closing lines was that I told them, "I've lost faith in the system.
But the founder of the Innocence Project, John Pray, wasn't sure what to think.
We called up Chris' attorney to get his side of things and see.
Sometimes the attorneys say, I, yeah, I am concerned about this case.
And he may be innocent.
Uh, unfortunately, in this case, we got the complete opposite.
The, Chris' attorney told us that we are totally wasting our time on this case.
He is very guilty.
And if Chris Ochoa was innocent, why did DNA tests place him at the scene of the crime?
12 years earlier, tests could only analyze one gene from Nancy DePriest's vaginal swab, the gene called DQ alpha.
But by the year 2000, the accuracy of DNA testing had advanced to a level where 10 genes could be analyzed.
The DNA testing that I'm doing today is more complicated, harder to interpret, um, more discriminating.
The Wisconsin Innocence Project asked local prosecutors to send Nancy DePriest's forensic samples for more sophisticated DNA testing, which they did.
12 years after Nancy DePriest's murder, Karen Scalise compared Chris Ochoa's blood DNA to the vaginal swab taken from the crime scene.
Karen Scalise compared Chris Ochoa's blood DNA to the vaginal swab taken from the crime scene.
I sort of went, "Oh, my God," and just immediately double-checked it to myself.
Just to make sure, additional DNA testing was also done by Ed Blake, who had performed the original DNA test a decade earlier.
When that work was done, uh, ultimately, Chris Ochoa, uh, Richard Danziger, and Nancy DePriest's husband were all eliminated, uh, as the source of the spermatozoa from Nancy DePriest.
Chris Ochoa, uh, Richard Danziger, and Nancy DePriest's husband were all eliminated, uh, as the source of the spermatozoa from Nancy DePriest.
But there was still the issue of Marino's gun.
Detective Fuentes decided to send it to another lab, the Southwest Institute in Dallas, for more tests.
The shell casing, without a doubt, uh, matched the gun that we got from Achim Marino.
And this was the shell casing that was found inside the Pizza Hut.
So now we had DNA.
And we had a bullet, or a shell casing, that was ejected at the crime scene, that matched the, the gun that we got from Achim Marino.
As a last step, prosecutors compared Achim Marino's DNA to the semen from Nancy DePriest's vaginal swab.
It matched just as Marino said it would.
Everybody says they're innocent in prison.
But, yeah, some of us are actually are.
Achim Marino's confession includes a chilling account of what happened the day Nancy DePriest was murdered.
Nancy DePriest was murdered.
But it also answered many questions.
I was wearing a, uh, workman's uniform with a false name on it.
And I'd knocked on the, uh, side door.
And Ms. DePriest came up and unlocked the door just before the restaurant opened.
Once inside, Marino held Nancy at gunpoint and demanded the restaurant's money.
Get under the sink.
Get under there.
Then, we went to the restroom where I disrobed her, then assaulted her one time.
But after that, I told her that I was going to handcuff her to the, uh, the plumbing underneath the sink, and leave her there.
She got underneath the sink.
I shot her in the back of the head one time with a .22, uh, firearm.
But he made the mistake of leaving the shell casing behind.
I was looking for that shell.
But I couldn't find it anywhere.
After that, I went back and got my bag, packed my stuff up.
And I left.
Marino says Nancy reminded him of a female guard he knew from prison, a woman he detested.
When I came out, not only did I intend to kill a whole bunch of Blacks and Mexicans, but I, I told myself the first White woman I ran across that looked like her, I was going to blow her brains out.
I was going to blow her brains out.
And that's exactly what I did.
But the bigger question is why Chris Ochoa would repeated confess to a crime he didn't commit.
You'd have to be a psychologist.
It's hard for me to, to conceive.
I, it's, in fact, when I first met Mr. Ochoa's attorneys for, and, and, uh, Mr. Danziger's, uh, attorneys when they first brought me back, the first thing I asked them was, "What in a world made Ochoa confess?"
Most people will come and tell me, "I would have never confessed to it."
You know what?
Don't tell me that.
Because you weren't sitting in that chair.
Ochoa said he was threatened with the death penalty unless he confessed, a technique most law enforcement interrogation experts say is improper.
The law, fortunately or unfortunately, allows police officers to lie to individuals being interrogated.
What they can't say is, if you don't confess to me, you're going to get the death penalty, if they knew that to be a lie.
Or, if you do confess to me, uh, I'll, I'll make sure you don't, you don't go to prison or you don't get charged on this crime.
I'll make sure you don't, you don't go to prison or you don't get charged on this crime.
So they can lie about the evidence.
And they can lie about other circumstances having to do with the interrogation.
But they can't tell lies that could be regarded as promises or threats.
Ochoa said his confession included details of the crime because police showed him pictures of the crime scene before his confession.
What about this?
Why'd you do that?
I'm not-- Off the top of my head, I can't think of a circumstance in which it would be appropriate.
Off the top of my head, I can't think of a circumstance in which it would be appropriate.
Because it contaminates the suspect.
And it means that if they are innocent and made the false confession, you'll never know.
Ochoa also says he was threatened physically.
He looked me up and down, and said, "You're young.
You're, you're never been in jail.
You're going to be fresh meat.
And they're going to have you.
And to me, in my mind, that triggered off, well, they're going to rape me.
Experts say the way to prevent police-induced false confessions is to videotape the entire interrogation.
If I knew-- If a suspect later alleges police misconduct in the interrogation room, the videotape can be evaluated.
If a suspect later alleges police misconduct in the interrogation room, the videotape can be evaluated.
Look at the pictures.
If Chris' confession had been videotaped from start to end, there is no way that this would have happened.
First of all, the police officers, undoubtedly, would not have acted as they did.
It would have been a deterrent to their misconduct.
Currently, only two states require all suspect interrogations to be videotaped-- Alaska and Minnesota.
The Austin Police Department changed its policy, and now videotapes the interrogations in all homicide cases.
After 12 years in prison, on January 16, 2001, Chris Ochoa was a free man.
Chris Ochoa was a free man.
Two months later, Richard Danziger was released to the care of his family.
Because of the brain damage he sustained as a result of the prison fight, Richard Danziger will require specialized care for the rest of his life.
I, sometimes I think about Richard.
And he, you know, I, I feel very bad.
I mean, because I was, I didn't have the courage to face up whatever might come to me so that he wouldn't go to prison.
The officers involved in Chris Ochoa's interrogation have all refused to comment.
I was a little kid, they told me that police officers were there to take care of you, to protect you.
I thought that they couldn't do no wrong.
I thought they were honest.
But I see that they, not all of them are.
I lost my child.
I loved her so much.
I miss her every day still.
For 13 years, I miss her every day.
And Chris lost 12 years, his youth, his whole youth.
Richard Danziger is brain damaged from a beating he received in prison.
He's still serving that life sentence.
He'll serve it out.
In 1991, a high school girl vanished after attending a party.
Her abandoned vehicle was found in a school parking lot near her home.
The prime suspect had not one, but two alibi witnesses for the night she disappeared.
A solid alibi can often overcome much circumstantial evidence, but forensic evidence is another matter.
On a Saturday night in November of 1991, 17-year-old Crystal Faye Todd was dropped off in a mall parking lot after attending a party.
17-year-old Crystal Faye Todd was dropped off in a mall parking lot after attending a party.
Since Crystal didn't have to be home for another hour, she said she was going to get something to eat before heading home.
It was the last time Crystal was seen alive.
When she wasn't home by 1:00 AM, her mother contacted police.
Horry County Police.
May I help you?
She also called Crystal's best friend, Ken Register, who said he hadn't seen Crystal all night.
Ken Register, who said he hadn't seen Crystal all night.
After I talked to Ken Register, I called one of my friends, and he got up out the bed and come.
We went all over Conway hunting her, to see if we could find her car anywhere.
They found her car the next morning in a nearby school parking lot.
Her purse and coat were inside.
I don't know why-- I mean, I had the feeling.
Just something come over me that somebody had Crystal.
17-year-old Crystal Faye Todd was a senior in high school living in the small tobacco farming town of Conway, South Carolina.
I was 39 when she was born.
She was a miracle to me, and I just couldn't believe I had her.
I was proud of her, too.
Crystal's dad died when she was very young.
But she grew up as a happy child-- active in her church, sun in the youth group choir, and dreamt of going to college.
Shew as very lively, good personality, good humor, very outgoing.
She just loved to be with her friends hanging out and having a good time.
Just a few hours after Crystal's abandoned car was found in a school parking lot, two hunters in a remote field noticed a trail of blood.
It led to a nearby ditch.
There lay a woman's body, with multiple stab wounds and partially disrobed.
It was brutal, and it was, uh-- it's a scene that will be with me for a long time.
It was sexual in nature.
I mean, it wasn't a murder just to murder someone.
It was sexual gratification.
On the victim's finger was a high school ring.
Engraved on the inside was the name Crystal Todd.
I just wish it could have been me instead of her.
I've lived a long time. She hadn't lived no time.
Investigators thought the perpetrator might have been from outside the area.
But forensic evidence at the crime scene pointed much closer to home.
Well, I don't really have a life anymore.
I just exist.
I go from one day to the next.
And I don't even get up out of the bed and face another day.
It's just hard, but it don't get any better.
Residents of Conway, South Carolina were appalled by Crystal Faye Todd's senseless murder.
Medical examiner Dr. Jamie Downs performed the autopsy.
She did have the defense injury to the left hand.
Because we thought that odd at the time.
Why would someone have defended themself with their left hand?
She was right-handed.
Why not use your right hand or dominant hand?
The answer was discovered soon enough.
One of the stab wounds penetrated the left side of her skull, which would have immediately paralyzed her right side.
What does a defense would tell you?
It tells you the victim was conscious.
It tells you the victim was not bound.
It tells you the victim was cognizant of danger.
Some of the wounds didn't cause bleeding-- an indication they were made after death.
The victim is completely dead.
The victim is there is no longer struggling, yet the offender still had enough anger that he incised or cut the body after death.
In all, she was stabbed 31 times.
The term that we use is overkill.
That's more wounding than is necessary to take someone's life.
When Dr. Downs measured the wounds, he concluded that the murder weapon was a three and a half inch knife-- the type with a blade that locks in place.
It would have had to be a locking blade, or it couldn't have penetrated the skull.
Forensic evidence confirmed she had been sexually assaulted, and that she was murdered on one side of the road and the body dumped on the other.
Well, what it told me is that he was panicking and he simply wanted to disassociate himself from the crime.
It told me that he probably had never killed before and he was inexperienced in this type of crime.
In search for suspects, investigators first looked through Crystal's personal papers.
On one of Crystal's school notebooks was the name Andy Tyndall, written on the cover.
Andy Tyndall, written on the cover.
Friends say Crystal met Tyndall through a mutual acquaintance.
Tyndall was a 31-year-old convicted thief, wanted in Alabama for a parole violation.
Police also discovered that he had a taste for high school girls.
No doubt about it, we thought we had our man.
He fit what we were looking for.
Forensic scientists evaluated the rape test kit from Crystal's autopsy and discovered that the killer had Type-O blood with an extremely rare blood subtype characterized by the enzyme PGM.
Type-O blood with an extremely rare blood subtype characterized by the enzyme PGM.
It stands phosphoglycerate mutase.
That is an enzyme that is stable in body fluids from individuals.
The blood type, the secreter status, and the PGM subtype made him approximately 2% of the popular.
And the DNA profile of the perpetrator was highly unusual, as well.
We found that the profile was, in fact, rare, and occurred with a frequency of approximately 1 in 250 million Caucasians and one and 1.5 billion blacks.
Surprisingly, this forensic information exonerated their prime suspect, Andy Tyndall.
More than 1,000 people attended Crystal Faye Todd's funeral.
Crystal's best friend served as her pallbearers.
Her grieving mother and police appealed to the community for any information about the crime.
In response, a resident of Conway came forward to say he had driven by the school parking lot on the night Crystal disappeared, and saw Crystal's car with a man and a woman standing beside it.
Now police had another lead.
A police sketch of his description looked too many like Crystal's mother Bonnie and her boyfriend.
Bonnie and her boyfriend.
There is no question in my mind, as I sit here today, that the individual in this sketch was Bonnie Faye Todd's boyfriend.
Police wondered just how much Crystal's mother knew about the murder.
Crystal's mother knew about the murder.
A witnesses told police that on the night Crystal disappeared, he had seen two people standing near Crystal's car in the parking lot.
His description matched Crystal's mother and her mother's boyfriend.
But when questioned further, the witness admitted he had been drinking that night and may have seen Crystal's mother on Sunday morning, when she and her boyfriend found Crystal's car.
I thought it was awful, that, much as I love my daughter, to even try to blame it on me.
With Bonnie no longer a suspect and their previous suspect, Andy Tyndell, exonerated by DNA testing, investigators had no other leads.
So police commissioned a behavioral profile of the killer.
Well, criminal behavior profiling is when you have an unsolved case and you study the crime and the behavior of the offender during the commission of the crime, and you arrive at characteristics.
It's a subjective opinion.
You arrive at characteristics and traits of the unidentified offender, such as age, race, marital status, arrest history, educational level-- things of that nature.
The profile suggested that Crystal's killer was a white male in his early 20s, and was a friend of Crystal's who lived within three miles of her home.
The young man was angry, and probably had a police record.
He was physically strong.
Above all, the profile suggested that he was confident he would never be considered a suspect.
Since the profile suggested that the killer was one of Crystal's friends, police asked her male classmates and acquaintances to voluntarily give blood samples for DNA testing.
Despite the challenge to their civil liberties, 52 men complied.
52 men complied.
It wasn't-- well, anything's voluntary.
But they still had a pool of names that they were pulling from.
And then when they pulled the name, then they would ask if you would go down and give the DNA test-- or give the specimen.
And everybody volunteered.
I haven't heard of anybody not doing it.
Incredibly, one of those DNA profiles matched the DNA of the perpetrator, donor number 44.
When investigators asked Crystal's mother to name the one person she would least expect to hurt her daughter, she identified the same man.
He says who do you trust her with, day or night, anytime, anywhere, that she won't date?
And I said Ken Register.
Ken Register and Crystal Todd had known each other since childhood.
Their relationship wasn't romantic.
There was simply very good friends.
They spoke together almost every day.
And it was Ken who Mrs. Todd first called for help on the night Crystal disappeared.
Ken has also been one of Crystal's pallbearers.
When police checked Ken Register's background, they discovered two troubling pieces of information.
First, he had an explosive temper, and he also had a criminal record.
Two months earlier, two local college students accused Register of exposing himself when he stopped to ask for directions.
I'm lost.
I'm looking for the library.
Can you help me out here?
Ew, you asshole.
Ew! What the hell?
Three years before that, as a 15-year-old, Register was caught making obscene telephone calls to this woman, in which he described in detail how he wanted to assault and murder her.
Register was caught making obscene telephone calls to this woman, in which he described in detail how he wanted to assault and murder her.
He said he would slit me wide open, and many other graphic descriptions.
The murder registered described in these calls was identical to the murder of Crystal Faye Todd.
Exactly where were you the night that Crystal died?
But Ken Register was flabbergasted when told his blood DNA matched Crystal's killer.
He asked police, rhetorically, why he would have agreed to a blood test if he was the killer.
When police search Register's car, they could find no evidence linking him to the crime scene.
Register also had an alibi.
His girlfriend said he was with her at this go kart track that night, and his mother said Ken was home by 12:30.
That alibi was about as strong as you're going to get-- very surprising to me.
And it's always compelling evidence.
I know where I was at, when I was at there that night-- right here at my house.
And I know when he came home.
Although Ken Register's mother was his alibi witness, she would later play a key role in solving Crystal Todd's murder.
Crystal Todd's best friend, Ken Register, was now the prime suspect in her murder.
His DNA matched the DNA found at the crime scene, but he insisted he was innocent, and provided two alibi witnesses-- his girlfriend and his mother.
Ken had been a regular guest in Crystal's home, but Mrs. Todd said she knew nothing about his criminal past.
If I had known about indecent exposure and threatening phone calls, Ken Register would never have put his foot in my house.
But I didn't find out about it until it was too late.
And Mrs. Todd now reveals something her daughter told her, which may hint at the motive.
In the week and a half before she was killed, she said, Mama, Ken's still wanting me to date him.
I said, well, he must think a lot of you, having a girlfriend.
And she said that's all he wanted was sex.
And I said, well, don't go with him, then.
Let's go over this again.
During police questioning, Ken Register denied any involvement in the murder.
Ken Register denied any involvement in the murder.
But towards the end of a six-hour interrogation, police told him his mother had sent him a message.
Thank you.
Ken, here's a note from your mother.
Your mother says to tell us exactly what happened, and to be truthful about it.
And if you do, your mother says everything will be OK.
And with that, Ken Register confessed.
I did it.
He said he saw Crystal around midnight at a traffic light near the school parking lot.
Hey, Crystal.
Hey. -Hey, what's up?
Hey. -How are you?
Good. -Hey, listen.
You want to go hang out or do something for a little bit?
Yeah, cool. All right.
Just let me go park.
All right. I'll follow you.
Crystal got into his car.
They drove to a deserted location, where Register said the two had consensual sex.
The forensic evidence suggests it wasn't consensual at all.
What, no condom?
What, are you stupid?
Oh my god.
Look Ken, I'm telling you right now-- if I get pregnant, I'm telling everybody you raped me.
I'm telling everybody you raped me.
Don't blow it off.
I'm serious. Asshole.
When she got out of the car to get dressed, Register said he grabbed the hunting knife from the car and killed her.
Register said he grabbed the hunting knife from the car and killed her.
Further sexual activity took place after death.
I don't think Crystal Faye Todd did anything that night to cause her death, other than the mere fact she got in the car with him.
Prosecutors believe that Register cleaned his car sometime after the crime to remove possible evidence.
The evidence had been systematically destroyed before we realized that he was a suspect.
In Register's home, police found an empty box-- a box for a knife with a locking blade.
Forensic scientists determined that the missing knife would have been similar to the weapon used to inflict Crystal's stab wounds.
Before the trial, Register recanted his confession, saying it was coerced.
He said police lied to him about the contents of his mother's note.
But lying to a suspect during a police interrogation is perfectly legal.
There's no doubt in my mind that Mr. register brutally and viciously killed Crystal Faye Todd.
And there's also no doubt in my mind that he enjoyed doing it.
I mean, there was just too much time unaccounted for.
He had plenty, .
Ample time to do everything that he was accused of and still be home when he said he got home.
But why did Register willingly give a blood sample for DNA testing if he was the perpetrator?
Published reports say that when police requested a DNA sample, Ken register asked, what is DNA?
Ken register asked, what is DNA?
At the time, DNA testing had been used in criminal cases for about five years, but Register was apparently unfamiliar with it, since it hadn't yet been used in the state of South Carolina.
His case was the first.
Ken register was convicted of murder, kidnapping, and sexual assault.
He was sentenced to life in prison plus 35 years.
They found him guilty.
And I was glad they found him guilty now.
I was proud of that.
But I want him to get the electric chair.
A mental job, psycho.
I don't know what's wrong, but something's not clicking to where it's supposed to be clicking.
Ken Register and his family still say he is innocent, but several subsequent DNA tests have all confirmed the original findings.
I know what I know because I know I was home that night, and I know when he came home.
I can't explain the DNA.
I wish I could.
There's so many questions in this that you can't explain.
Based on everything that I know about the violence of this crime is that when he left the scene of that murder, he would have been a bloody mess.
I think there's a lot of covering up going on in that house.
She seen him covered in blood all over, and I know he was covered in blood all over.
He had to be.
And she helped clean him up.
She got Crystal's blood on her hands, too.
Bonne Faye Todd visits Crystal's grave faithfully.
And she thanks science for bringing Crystal's killer to justice.
Crystal's killer to justice.
I love you more than I do my own life.
Without the DNA and the blood, we would have never gotten to first base-- probably never even made an arrest.
That's scary. -Yeah.
A young woman vanished from her home on an island in rural Canada.
Thousands of police, Army, and local residents spent months searching for her.
This is the story of how one tiny, white hair solved the mystery of her disappearance while adding a new chapter to the history of forensic science.
Prince Edward Island, Canada's smallest province, a 2,100-square mile vacation destination in the summer, cold and desolate in the winter.
Father Eloi Arsenault has ministered to the islanders for almost 30 years.
We're not used to big, violent things going on because people are very much down to Earth and everybody knows everyone because we're a small community.
There's not a very large population on the island, you know?
On October 7, 1994, a woman called police to report an abandoned car in a field near her house.
The license plates were missing and when police looked inside, they saw what looked to be a crime scene.
There were blood stains, small specks of blood on the windshield, on the inside of the windshield, on the side windows of the vehicle, inside.
These dots indicate the location of blood inside the car.
Forensic scientists identified the blood as medium-impact blood spatter, the type caused when someone is hit with an object like a fist.
The serial number of the vehicle identified the owner as a local woman, 32-year-old Shirley Duguay.
Shirley was a stay at home mother of five children, the oldest 15, the youngest, eight-year old twins.
Shirley and her children were living in this home, now abandoned in the small town of Richmond.
Her father, Melvin, had been watching the children since Shirley disappeared four days earlier.
Well, we found it very odd that no one had reported her missing initially and of course, it raised some suspicion with us.
Shirley Duguay had been known in the past to take off for a couple of days and not tell anyone where she had gone and then return.
Police suspected it was Shirley's blood in the car.
The pillow she sat on while driving was found nearby soaked in blood.
She was a very small, diminutive person, four feet, nine inches tall, less than 100 pounds.
So very, very frail looking individual.
Other than that, we didn't know too much about her.
To identify the blood, scientists needed a blood sample from Shirley's father, Melvin, for DNA testing.
Since Shirley would get half of her DNA from each parent, scientists found that the blood in the car contained 50% of Melvin Duguay's genetic markers, meaning the blood was Shirley's.
While examining the blood, forensic scientists found something else, blood that did not come from Shirley Duguay.
Was this the blood of another victim or possibly the blood of a killer?
After Shirley Duguay's car was found abandoned and spattered with blood, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police began one of the largest searches in the history of Prince Edward Island.
They checked hundreds of square miles and every waterway in the area.
We used psychics, we used hypnosis, anything that we could put our hands on Earth or could think of, we used it.
Some of the revelations were very unusual.
Psychics have even told us that she was buried near water or pine trees, shallow grave, but where?
You just don't know where to start.
About a half mile away from Shirley's car, police found a shovel with two long, black hairs attached.
When scientists compared that hair to hair taken from Shirley Duguay's hair brush, they were microscopically similar.
The search for Shirley's body lasted for weeks, then investigators came upon a possible clue.
15 miles from Shirley's car, police found a plastic bag with a pair of sneakers and a blood-stained leather jacket The blood on the leather jacket matched Shirley Duguay's DNA profile.
The blood on the leather jacket matched Shirley Duguay's DNA profile.
Shirley Duguay's DNA profile.
But the jacket was a man's size, much too big to belong to Shirley.
When police asked Melvin Duguay who might have wanted to harm his daughter, his response was startling.
I would have killed him.
I would have killed that guy.
He was talking about Shirley's estranged husband, Doug Beamish, a demolition worker who had been separated from Shirley for the past 18 months.
Doug Beamish, a demolition worker who had been separated from Shirley for the past 18 months.
I think I would have did a good deed if I had a shot him, killed him, because she'd be alive today.
I'd be in jail but she'd be alive.
During the couple's on again, off again 15-year relationship, police learned that Beamish had physically abused Shirley.
15-year relationship, police learned that Beamish had physically abused Shirley.
Every woman that lives with an abusive husband or boyfriend or whatever and end up murdered react in the same way.
People advise them to not go with them or live with them but for some reason they do.
During police questioning, Beamish denied any involvement in Shirley's disappearance.
Beamish denied any involvement in Shirley's disappearance.
Where were you on October the 3rd?
Then, investigators asked him what size shoes he wore.
The same size as the sneakers found with the bloody leather jacket.
Now, police wanted to know if Doug Beamish had worn these shoes.
Beamish had worn these shoes.
So they turned to a forensic podiatrist, Dr. Keith Bettles.
Everyone wears shoes differently, mostly because of the variations in size, shape, and mechanics of their feet.
Each individual has a unique way of walking.
This ultimately is transmitted to the sole of the feet, which again is transmitted to the inner sole of the shoe and again onto the outside of the shoe as to where the walking to the wear that's individual's shoe.
With a warrant, police cast Beamish's feet by placing them in Styrofoam molds, then poured plaster of Paris inside.
Once hardened, the molds can be compared to the wear patterns in a pair of shoes.
This computer-generated image shows how these wear patterns are created.
The different colors indicate the amount of pressure made by each part of the foot as it touches the inside of the shoe.
The feet create marks called pressure points and are unique to each person.
Mr. Beamish's toe was hyperflexed, that means it just turned up a little bit at the end.
The nails would be chafing away and rubbing at the inner lining of the shoe.
And Beamish's feet were pronated, meaning they turned inward.
When Doctor Bettles cut open the sneakers, he found wear patterns caused by pronated feet and chafing marks in the top of the shoe like those caused by hyperflexed toes.
After I'd done the examination of the sneakers, I was quite satisfied that these shoes had been worn at the time by Mr. Beamish.
I was quite satisfied that these shoes had been worn at the time by Mr. Beamish.
But Doug Beamish denied the sneakers were his.
He also denied owning the leather jacket found with the shoes.
Inside the jacket, investigators discovered even more evidence, 20 brittle white hairs.
20 brittle white hairs.
Under a microscope, the hairs did not appear to be human.
Human hairs have thin medullas, the cord that runs through the center of the hair.
These hairs had thick medullas, meaning they were animal hairs.
But what animal?
Constable Roger Savoie thought he had an answer.
He remembered something from his interview with Doug Beamish.
It was the type of observation we make hundreds of times each day but usually forget.
Savoie recalled that he saw a cat in Doug Beamish's home, but it wasn't just any cat.
It was a pure white one.
A cat Beamish called Snowball.
Savoie also recalled that the cat rubbed up against his leg during his visit leaving a number of white hairs on his trousers, hairs that looked identical to the ones found in the bloody leather jacket.
Investigators now wondered whether there was any way to prove scientifically whether the cat hairs on the leather jacket belonged to Snowball.
33-year old Shirley Duguay was still missing but a leather jacket stained with her blood was found 15 miles from her abandoned car.
Police believe the leather jacket was the key to her disappearance.
The person involved in Shirley's death was likely wearing that jacket because it was not Shirley's jacket.
So we had to put the jacket on somebody.
We had to prove that jacket belonged to someone.
Inside the jacket were several brittle, white hairs, which were suspected to be from Doug Beamish's cat.
If we could prove that it was this particular cat's hair, then we would be able to say that this belonged to Mr. Beamish, the jacket.
And the job was to find someone that could do this type of testing.
Savoie made hundreds of telephone calls and found, to his surprise, that forensic testing on cat hair had never been done before anywhere in the world.
But he was fortunate enough to come across Dr. Stephen O'Brien, a geneticist at the National Cancer Institute in the United States who had spent decades studying hereditary illness in cats.
O'Brien, a geneticist at the National Cancer Institute in the United States who had spent decades studying hereditary illness in cats.
The Constable said to me on the phone, Dr. O'Brien, I've looked all over the country, in fact, all over the world for an expert in cat DNA technology because I would like very much to know whether or not the hairs that were in the lining of the jacket, which are tied to the scene of the crime because the jacket was covered with the victim's blood, are those hairs from Snowball?
I've looked all over the country, in fact, all over the world for an expert in cat DNA technology because I would like very much to know whether or not the hairs that were in the lining of the jacket, which are tied to the scene of the crime because the jacket was covered with the victim's blood, are those hairs from Snowball?
Dr. O'Brien asked Canadian police for a blood sample from Mr Beamish's cat, but this was more difficult than expected.
Snowball wasn't at all cooperative.
It took approximately half an hour from chasing the cat from under the beds to every room in the house until-- it was almost like the cat knew that we were taking him in.
Roger Savoie told me he went down to the house and read out the rights, the cat's rights to the parents.
And I said to Roger, what did the cat say?
And he said, meow.
There's an old saying with the RCMP, we always get our man, but this case, we had to go to say we always get our cat.
After finally capturing the cat, Snowball was taken to a local veterinarian's office for the necessary blood sample Dr. Jane Bond drew the blood as two Canadian officers stood by to take custody of the sample in order to preserve the chain of evidence.
Snowball was taken to a local veterinarian's office for the necessary blood sample Dr. Jane Bond drew the blood as two Canadian officers stood by to take custody of the sample in order to preserve the chain of evidence.
Snowball's blood and cat hairs taken from the leather jacket were delivered in person to Dr. O'Brien and his team.
One of the hairs contained a root, which was cut into pieces and put into a buffer solution, which dissolved everything except the DNA.
It was then amplified or photocopied so scientists had enough for their tests.
The DNA profile of the hair found in the leather jacket was then compared to the DNA from Snowball's blood.
We got a very clear match between the genotype of each of the markers in the hair to each of the same markers in Snowball and the only way that that could have happened is that they came from the same cat.
But Prince Edward Island is isolated and there are thousands of cats there.
Was it possible because of inbreeding, isolation, or just plain feline promiscuity that another cat on the island had the same genetic profile as Snowball?
If so, the DNA match would be useless.
You need to know that some other cat on Prince Edward Island couldn't have contributed that hair.
What if 25% of the cats on Prince Edward Island had the same DNA profile?
Or even one in 100 cats?
So that's the next question you have to ask.
What is the frequency of that profile?
Blood samples were taken from 20 cats on Prince Edward Island and sent to Dr. O'Brien and his team.
The DNA profiles of these 20 cats showed a rich genetic diversity.
The chance that the cat hair found on the leather jacket belonged to a cat other than Snowball was estimated to be one in 70 million.
This was the break Canadian investigators had been hoping for.
And then, after seven months of searching, a fisherman found the last piece of evidence.
28 weeks into Shirley Duguay's disappearance, a fisherman along Canada's Enmore River saw a pile of brush on the riverbank that looked out of place.
As he moved the brush away, he saw what appeared to be a human body.
It was a very shallow grave dug just deep enough to cover the body.
The person was a very tiny person.
We knew Shirley Duguay was less than 5 feet tall, less than 100 pounds.
Obviously, we expected it was Shirley Duguay.
I was alone by myself and it started to snow.
It was a freak snowstorm and I recall all I had on was a rain jacket.
And I felt bad because the body was partly uncovered.
So I took my rain jacket, which was all I had to keep warm and put it on top of the grave to keep the snow off her.
Ironically, Shirley's body was buried in a spot nearly identical to what the police psychic predicted, near the water, under pine trees.
It was just lucky that they found her when they did because the police told me that within two or three weeks more, and they would have had a hard time to identify her because the ground was thawing out.
They knew that there was very little hope of finding her alive and when they found her, they were very relieved in the sense that they knew, at least, that they could have a service for her and pray and get together and they could sort of bring a closure to it.
At the autopsy, the cause of death was determined to be blunt force trauma.
Just as the blood spatter in her car suggested.
Shirley's nose was broken and her jaw broken in three places.
One of her front teeth was found embedded in her lung.
Doug Beamish was arrested and charged with murder.
Scientists discovered that it was his blood mixed with Shirley's inside her abandoned car.
But what was his motive?
Police discovered Beamish had written Shirley a letter threatening to kill her before he'd allow her to get custody of their children.
Shirley a letter threatening to kill her before he'd allow her to get custody of their children.
The whole letter was written in blood.
It was just one page, mind you, but it was written in blood.
Although Beamish denied owning the leather jacket stained with Shirley's blood, police found this photograph taken the day before Shirley's disappearance.
In it, he is wearing a jacket identical to the one found at the crime scene.
Well, actually he has no defense at all except to say, I didn't do it.
I didn't do it.
But I think if you interviewed all the prisoners in the prisons in Canada, they'd all say, I didn't do it.
I didn't do it.
That's pretty well-- they've always got someone else to blame on.
You know, criminals do that.
They always blame someone else for their problems.
Certainly, you never see a criminal go in court and say, I did it, Judge.
After going to great lengths to cover up the crime, Beamish never realized that petting his cat before the murder would be his downfall.
Beamish never realized that petting his cat before the murder would be his downfall.
One in three criminals have cats and maybe one in four have a dog.
So when you go to the scene of the crime and if there is a trace of DNA there, it's like leaving your name, your rank, and social security number, which can be used.
And failing to have the individual's, if they leave their pets' parts there, that can implicate them, too.
This is what happened with Mr. Beamish.
His pet cat implicated him.
Doug Beamish was tried and convicted of Shirley Duguay's murder and sentenced to 18 years in prison.
The case is among the most celebrated in forensic history because it is the first time that animal DNA was used to convict a murderer.
Since then, we've received calls from, after the investigation, from all over the world, literally.
I received calls from Japan asking us how this worked.
How did the animal DNA work?
I mean, I was actually surprised.
Once the Snowball case became well-known among the forensic community, I would say about once every two weeks, I would receive a phone call from a police department that was investigating a crime where an animal hair had been left behind and they were asking us to help them.
T.S. Eliot penned these lines in his "Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats,"
We've learned that applies to their DNA, too.
And Doug Beamish now wishes that this wasn't true.
In a small town in Oregon in 1984, the first biological attack was launched against the United States.
For over a decade, the details of this nearly catastrophic event were withheld from the public.
This is how forensic science unearthed the biological trail.
This small town in Oregon is called The Dalles.
And it's perched high above the Columbia River, about 80 miles due east of Portland.
It seems like you've driven back from the 50s.
And It seems-- in the physical appearance-- it seems frozen in time that way.
Dave and Sandy Lutgens are among the 11,000 residents who find The Dalles the perfect place to raise a family.
A half an hour or an hour from skiing-- a lot of water sports, a lot of hiking-- it has pretty decent schools.
We have pretty low crime.
On September 25th 1984, David and Sandy both became violently ill with cramps, diarrhea, and vomiting.
David and Sandy both became violently ill with cramps, diarrhea, and vomiting.
Their dehydration caused delirium.
I've never felt that my life.
The room was spinning and I just didn't care about anything.
Well, let's put it this way.
I would never want to be that sick again.
When David and his wife went to the hospital, they weren't the only ones seriously ill.
And then suddenly, there were so many people.
We had people laying on the floor.
We had people leaning up against the wall.
There were people in the lobby.
They all had the same symptoms.
Microbiologists identified the cause-- salmonella.
Salmonella is a bacteria commonly found in eggs, meat, poultry, on pasteurized milk, water-- and in animal feces, especially that of reptiles.
It is rarely fatal.
But sometimes death occurs in infants and the elderly.
10 days after the first outbreak, a second wave hit.
The number of patients exploded from dozens to hundreds.
Every hospital bed was filled.
By the time Dave Lutgens emerged from four days of delirium, he encountered a disaster.
Lutgens owned a small restaurant.
13 of his employees were sick, along with hundreds of his customers.
We had virtually no business.
I mean it just disappeared.
It was tough.
I mean, that was-- I was in the process of building another facility in Hood River.
I was gonna have it all paid for and open it up debt- free and it didn't work out that way.
But what was the source of the outbreak.
Food handlers who don't properly wash their hands after using the bathroom sometimes transmit salmonella.
But hundreds of people were sick.
And they hadn't eaten in the same restaurant, or even the same restaurant chain.
Tests of the water supply revealed nothing.
The Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, Georgia was asked to investigate whether it was some type of accidental outbreak.
Or, was it intentional.
Solving the riddle of the salmonella outbreak in Oregon is the job of epidemiologists-- scientists who study how disease moves through large populations.
It seemed to be unrelated events complicated things greatly.
It was almost like doing multiple simultaneous investigations.
There seemed to be no common link among the hundreds of residents who had gotten sick.
Dave and Sandy Lutgens both remembered eating a salad in their restaurant before getting ill.
I think we were too sick to worry that much about it at that time.
It was later that we started wondering if it was gonna close us down.
Hundreds of their customers and most of their employees became ill too.
At the county health department, nurse Dianne Kerr contacted everyone who fell ill.
And discovered they had all eaten a salad from one of 10 local restaurants.
Most of the people seemed to have eaten potato salad.
In another restaurant, most people seemed to have a green salad.
So what was going on?
They looked at common suppliers of food.
They looked-- where did everybody get their lettuce?
Where did everybody get this?
Where did everybody get that?
We couldn't find one source of cucumbers, or lettuce, or meat or of anything that would explain all those restaurants being contaminated at once.
Dr. Michael Skeels runs the laboratory that processed samples from The Dalles salmonella outbreak.
Microbiologists discovered that all of the victims had the same strain of salmonella.
One that was exceptionally rare.
It was [inaudible] negative, which means it didn't biochemically break down a sugar called [inaudible].
And that's only the case for 2% of salmonellas of this type.
This salmonella had another odd characteristic.
Unlike most bacteria, this one was not resistant to antibiotics.
When all the cases were tallied, there had been 751 cases of salmonella poisoning.
Ten percent were restaurant workers.
And these people became ill before outbreaks-- the outbreak was noticed among customers.
Nevertheless, two months after the outbreak, the state of Oregon reported that poor hygiene of restaurant workers and cross-contamination were the most likely causes of the outbreak.
In other words, they didn't know.
The Oregon Health Department basically hung us out-- and said well, it was-- dirty employees.
It was unsafe practices-- unsafe handling of food.
Officials found no salmonella in Dave Lutgens' restaurant.
But they did find traces of it in some of the other restaurants.
If you've worked in public health long enough, you'll figure out that lots of times, you really can't pinpoint where things come from.
The health officials said, this is the best we can tell you.
It wasn't a very satisfying explanation for them, or for the public, or for the press.
But at that time, there was no other explanation.
Local officials now began to suspect a religious cult outside town-- the Rajneeshees.
As the Rajneeshees expanded their compound, there had been growing tension between the cult leaders and local politicians.
Just a year earlier, one of the cult's leaders, Ma Anand Sheela, hinted at potential violence.
Ma Anand Sheela, hinted at potential violence.
She said, quote, "we are here in Oregon to stay, at whatever the cost.
If that means some blood is spilled, then this is the price we are prepared to pay."
A guru from India, Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh, started the farming commune in 1981.
After two years, and $30 million, the 64,000 acre organic farming and meditation compound had its own post office, school, hospital, and shopping mall-- with housing for over 1,000 followers.
There were doctors, and lawyers, and accountants who've given up everything for dry crackers and plant potatoes.
And have daily chants.
As he drove through the compound each day in one of his 80 Rolls Royce automobiles, the guru preached the benefits of meditation, and free love.
Published reports say that the Bhagwan claimed to have had more sex partners than anyone in history.
In 1982, the Rajneeshees took over the nearby town of Antelope, and with it, the majority of seats on the city council and school board, which horrified long time residents of the small town.
Before the outbreak, the Rajneeshees had set their sights on control of the larger town of The Dalles.
And had put up their own slate of candidates running in the November election.
In the absence of a scientific explanation, some thought the Rajneeshees might have intentionally poisoned the community in some way.
So there was suspicion, but there was no evidence, Why would they do this.
Why would they do this.
And the other thought was there was somebody-- some hothead trying to incriminate the Rajneesh.
One year later, the Rajneeshee's behavior grew even more bizarre, revealing evidence that would eventually solve the mystery.
Since health officials could not find the source of the salmonella outbreak in The Dalles, Oregon, suspicion among local officials continued to be the Rajneeshees, a religious cult living on a farm outside of town.
Oregon, suspicion among local officials continued to be the Rajneeshees, a religious cult living on a farm outside of town.
Like criminals being accused of poisoning someone who we had nothing to do with.
Leaders of the cult and town officials were often at odds.
The cult was founded by Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh.
But the day- to- day operations were run by his associate, Ma Anand Sheela.
Ma Anand Sheela.
They met each others' needs.
Sheela provided for him whatever he wanted.
You want 60 Rolls Royces?
We'll get 60 Rolls Royces.
Do you want a new disciple tonight, we'll get you a new disciple.
You want to fly in a jet, we'll get you-- whatever can make you happy.
And the trade off was that the Bhagwan would say, OK, you're number one.
You're in control.
You take care of all the details.
I don't care how you do it.
The Rajneeshees were becoming paranoid for many reasons.
They were being investigated for possible immigration fraud.
And there was growing internal conflict between Sheela and other commune leaders.
Any nonsense, you'd better believe me.
I'm a tiger.
She and her group were in a power struggle with another group-- which we always called the Hollywood faction.
They were rich members of the cult, headed up by a lady who was the ex-wife of a Hollywood producer.
They had money.
They had access to Rajneesh.
And Sheela and her group were very paranoid about these people.
The struggle was for control of the guru, the cult, and its finances.
Former cult members told of plans to assassinate several local politicians, rival cult members, a United States Attorney, and journalist Lez Zaitz, in retaliation for some investigative pieces he had written about the group in the local newspaper.
Zaitz, in retaliation for some investigative pieces he had written about the group in the local newspaper.
To be told that you're on a hit list for a group that I believed at the time they were capable of-- that they were just purely evil folks by that time.
It was really a chilling, chilling way to start the day.
One year after the salmonella outbreak, without warning, Sheela and the head of the Rajneesh medical clinic, a nurse named Puja, fled to Europe.
Rajneesh disowned them.
They had turned it into a fascist concentration camp.
Prosecuters heard that Puja had been experimenting with biological poisons at the clinic, including salmonella.
But there was no hard evidence.
With the increasing scrutiny, the Bhagwan stepped up the level of personal security.
There were times when he would move from one end of the town to the other-- where he would be in a bulletproof limousine.
He would have a lead SUV with armed guards in it.
He would have a trailing SUV with armed guards in it.
And he'd have a jet Ranger helicopter.
We felt we could be confronted by a 45- person private army with fully automatic weapons.
In October of 1985, a federal grand jury issued a 35- page indictment, charging the Bhagwan with lying on his visa application, and arranging sham marriages so his followers could remain in the United States.
When officials planned to search the compound, they asked epidemiologist Dr. Mike Skeels to come along because of fears of biological retaliation.
Skeels to come along because of fears of biological retaliation.
And as we were going up that road, I was thinking for a microbiologist, this is going to be a pretty interesting day.
I was thinking for a microbiologist, this is going to be a pretty interesting day.
No shots were fired.
In the commune's licensed medical center, Skeels found samples of various bacteria, standard testing material for a small clinic.
Skeels found samples of various bacteria, standard testing material for a small clinic.
One of these vials contained salmonella typhimurium.
And I remember at the time thinking well they told me to look for salmonella.
If I find any, I'm supposed to seize it as evidence.
Well there it is, so I'll seize it.
But I wasn't thinking at all that this was related to the outbreak.
Shortly after the raid, Rajneesh left on one of his private jets.
Rajneesh left on one of his private jets.
He was arrested in North Carolina on the immigration charges.
Meanwhile, the CDC tested the salmonella found in the commune's lab using a technique called plasmid profiling.
Plasmids are sections of free-floating genetic material outside a bacterial chromosome.
Bacteria can exchange plasmids, allowing a colony to genetically adapt.
You would then use the size of the plasmid and some other characteristics of it to see whether it matched the plasmids from other bacteria-- mostly the size.
And so, if you found that you had a the same plasma type, you could assume that these were related or similar strains.
The salmonella from the Rajneeshees' clinic had a plasmid profile similar to the organism from The Dalles.
And it could be killed by antibiotics, just like the strain used in the epidemic.
That really was the smoking gun.
That showed us that the isolate that I found in their clinic and the isolates that we were getting from the people in this outbreak really were the same bacterial strain.
The question remained-- why would the Rajneeshees poison the residents of this small town.
Inside the Rajneeshee commune, investigators found evidence connecting the group to the mass salmonella poisonings.
And they discovered other bizarre activities.
Sheela had installed surveillance devices everywhere in the commune.
Every payphone in the town was tapped, and almost every building.
They wired this whole town.
There were illegal interceptions.
There were thousands of them.
They had banks of tape recorders running all the time.
It's indescribable.
Most Rajneeshees didn't know they were being monitored.
It was kept quiet by Sheela and her inner circle, which held their meetings on her round bed.
Or in secret rooms complete with escape tunnels.
The FBI also found a number of manuals for making bombs and doing dirty tricks.
And they found a number of articles about bioterrorism and biowarfare.
The salmonella was the weapon chosen for a power struggle, but not an internal one.
Did I understand you correctly yesterday when you said that you were in fact now going to attempt to takeover Wasco County?
That's correct.
You understood right.
When the Rajneeshees put up their own candidates to run for election for the local county commission, they wanted to make sure their candidates won.
To do that, they wanted to make the local voters sick enough so they couldn't get to the polling places to vote.
The Rajneeshees would have enough people in Antelope and other nearby places, that they would all vote-- a 100% turnout among the Rajneeshees.
Enough that they would install their own candidates on the county commission.
But why had the outbreak happened in September?
Informants say it was a rehearsal.
And it wasn't their first.
At Sheela's direction, the Rajneeshees took off their red robes and put on regular clothing, and went through the town with spray containers filled with salmonella.
In August, their first experiment was spraying the door handles in the county courthouse, and produce in the local supermarkets.
But no one got sick.
Their second experiment in September, was to spray salmonella on salad bars in ten local restaurants-- which worked, contaminating over 700 residents.
Just before election day, the Rajneeshees made plans to contaminate the city's water supply.
Apparently, they were unsuccessful.
There was evidence that someone had gotten to the reservoir for the city of The Dalles and had gotten into it.
But no evidence that they actually were contaminated.
All of the Rajneeshee candidates lost in the November elections.
Armed with the forensic biological evidence, Sheela and Puja were extradited from Europe, and charged with tampering with consumer products.
Sheela and Puja were extradited from Europe, and charged with tampering with consumer products.
They both pled guilty, served less than three years in federal prison, were released, and fled to Switzerland before state charges could be filed.
Last we knew, Sheela was in Europe running the equivalent of a nursing home, which is sort of chilling to think about.
Turning grandma over to Sheela in her final days.
There was no proof Rajneesh himself ever knew anything about the salmonella plot.
He pleaded guilty to immigration violations, was departed, and died in India in 1990.
Most of the restaurants targeted in the attack never recovered from the economic blow, and went out of business.
That's what happened to Dave Lutgens' restaurant.
We never regained the position.
We had in the community afterwards.
I had people that would tell me that I know it wasn't your fault, but I just can't eat there anymore.
He now runs a catering service.
The scientists who investigated the outbreak wrote a paper about it.
But the Centers for Disease Control asked that it not published, fearing copycat crimes.
In 1997, 13 years after the outbreak when bioterrorism had become a growing concern, the paper was finally published in the Journal of the American Medical Association.
Medical Association.
Evidence discovered in the Rajneeshees health clinic revealed that they had even more potent biological weapons in their possession.
Had they been used, the results would have been catastrophic.
Neither the epidemiology alone, nor, a criminal investigation alone, would have cracked this-- it took both to put together.
Ernestine Perea was found dead in her bedroom of a single gunshot wound.
The gun was by her side.
After examining the forensic evidence, her death was ruled a homicide.
But could that same evidence be interpreted differently?
One man's life hung in the balance.
In 1979, Martin Frias entered the United States illegally from Mexico looking for work.
More opportunity to raise your family, better way to educate your kids, a better life.
Frias landed a job at a local marble processing plant in the rural town of Wheatland, Wyoming.
Two years later, he met 24-year-old Ernestine Perea, a divorcee with a young daughter.
They had two children of their own, a boy, and a girl.
She was a good dancer.
We danced together good.
She was somebody you want to be with.
Ernestine and Martin decided to live together and rented a mobile home on the edge of town.
But they also fought, mostly over insignificant matters, says Martin.
On July 5, 1984, Ernestine spent the entire day out with her children and didn't arrive home until 10:30 that night.
Martin put the children to bed while Ernestine went to sleep in the couple's bedroom.
That night, Frias slept on the sofa bed in the living room.
Around 1 o'clock in the morning, Frias was awakened by one of the children crying.
She was like saying, mommy, mommy, get up.
Turned the light on.
And that's when I saw she was laying in the rug, right there on the floor.
She had the gun next to her.
Ernestine was dead from a gunshot wound.
I see blood on her stomach.
And when I was walking out [inaudible], I saw also blood splattered on the wall.
I saw also blood splattered on the wall.
So I call for ambulance and call the police.
There was no evidence of a break-in.
There was no evidence of anybody else being out at the trailer other than two small children, I believe, a four-year-old and a baby.
When questioned at the scene, Frias lied saying he wasn't home when Ernestine was shot.
Frias lied saying he wasn't home when Ernestine was shot.
Frias may have had reason to lie.
Police records showed that the Sheriff had been called to his home several times for domestic disturbances.
On a number of occasions, Ernestine said that Martin had hit her.
A forensic analysis revealed that Frias's fingerprints were all over the rifle.
And there was more evidence even more damning.
When Ernestine Perea was found dead of a gunshot wound, her common law husband, Martin Frias denied he was home when the shooting occurred.
But he later changed his story and admitted he was home that night.
Investigators discovered that Ernestine was with some male friends earlier on the day she died.
She had been wrestling in the grass.
She'd been drinking with these friends.
And also that Martin Frias had, evidently, ridden by the park at that time and very possibly may have seen them.
Frias said Ernestine had come home drunk.
Tests prove this correct.
Her blood alcohol level was 0.26, 2 and a 1/2 times the legal limit.
He also said they weren't getting along and had stopped sleeping together.
We knew there had been problems between the two of them.
He was sleeping out on the couch in the living room at that time.
He'd been banished from the bedroom.
Although he said he was sleeping down the hall, he claimed he never head the gun go off.
He told investigators he was sleeping on the couch at the other end of the hallway in the trailer.
And at some time, during the night, about the time when it's believed that the gun went off, he said he heard what he thought to be a twig breaking at night.
And he heard that and then he went back to sleep.
Frias said Ernestine committed suicide.
Next to Ernestine's body was a high powered 300 magnum hunting rifle which belonged to Frias.
His fingerprints were on the rifle.
Ernestine's fingerprint was found on the scope.
Her pants were ripped near the zipper.
And the button had been pulled off, indicating some sort of struggle.
Ernestine had a large wound in her abdomen and a much smaller wound in her back.
Since exit wounds are generally larger than entrance wounds, the coroner was certain that Ernestine had been shot in the back.
The blood had entered through a wound which was a little less than half inch in size, and struck the vertebrae, had gone through the body, and had come out through the abdomen on the front side.
Also supporting the homicide theory was the evidence on Ernestine's blouse.
On the inside of the shirt, there were copious amounts of, of course, blood and tissue.
But I also found bone fragments and lead fragments from the bullet as it was disintegrating passing through the body.
Proof Dr. Stone says that Ernestine was shot from behind.
The autopsy results found the same thing.
The results of that autopsy confirmed that the bullet had entered the back and had extended out the front.
And there was no gunshot residue on the front of the blouse, which would have been present had she committed suicide.
They did not find any evidence of that in the front or the back of the blouse.
And that indicated that the weapon was at least some 30 inches to three feet away, according to their findings.
Frias denied he murdered his wife and pointed to the fact that his right arm was broken and he wasn't able to maneuver the rifle himself.
Nevertheless, Ernestine's death was ruled a homicide.
Based on the forensic evidence, prosecutors believe that Frias and Ernenstine fought when she arrived home.
A violent tug from the rear ripped her pants, causing the bruises on her abdomen.
As Ernestine was getting up from the floor, prosecutors say Frias shot her in the back.
Blood spurted out of her stomach and struck the wall in front of her.
As she fell to the floor, her body twisted in reaction to the shot and she landed on her back.
Prosecutors say Frias left the rifle on the ground to make it appear the death was a suicide.
They didn't believe Frias' cast would've hindered his ability to fire the weapon.
I felt that the whole world fell on top of me.
It was just like a real nightmare.
I was just like, God, why me?
What do-- I mean.
I couldn't-- I was shocked.
I was shocked completely.
Martin Frias was charged with his wife's murder.
Since he couldn't afford an attorney, the court appointed one for him.
At the time, the state public defender's office used the state crime lab, the very same lab used by the prosecution.
They had already ruled Ernestine's death was a homicide.
Frias's attorney tried to come up with an alternative explanation for Ernestine's death, but he couldn't.
We felt bad about how the trial was going to go.
I remember a public defender investigator named, Walt Caroll, and I talking before the trial started about what a grim prospect it looked like for Martin.
Walt Caroll, and I talking before the trial started about what a grim prospect it looked like for Martin.
And they were right.
The jury convicted Frias of second degree murder and sentenced him to 25 to 35 years in prison.
But the story doesn't end there.
After the murder conviction of Martin Frias, his attorney, Robert Moxley, started gathering information to file an appeal.
Meanwhile, Moxley started to have misgivings about the competency of the state's pathologist who had performed the autopsy.
The pathologist in this case was not qualified to do forensic cases.
And that's probably being charitable.
So he asked Dr. Robert Lantz, an independent gunshot residue expert, to test Ernestine's blouse.
I'd used a much more sophisticated, much more modern technology called scanning electron microscopy with x-ray emission.
And what this does is it provides much better sensitivity for gunshot residue.
What this told me was the gunshot residue had come from the front, very clearly, and had followed the bullet right on through her abdomen and come out the back.
This contradicted tests done by the state crime lab, which found no evidence of gunshot residue anywhere on the blouse.
The tests that had been done by the crime lab were some rather archaic chemical tests where it's possible to do them just a little bit wrong and not find any gunshot residue.
Suddenly, Frias's story that Ernestine had committed suicide didn't seem so far fetched.
Yet, Frias remained behind bars.
When I left from prison, it was miserable.
I was mad, angry.
It was something that I don't wish on nobody-- go to prison for something he did not.
After two years in prison, Wyoming Supreme Court granted Frias a new trial.
Wyoming Supreme Court granted Frias a new trial.
But the defense had their work cut out for them.
Prosecutors ordered Ernestine's body exhumed for a second autopsy.
The chief medical examiner for Houston, Texas, Dr. Charles Petty performed this one.
Petty performed this one.
The results of the second autopsy were the same as the first.
The bullet entered Ernestine's back and came out through for stomach.
I think that the evidence showed, at that time, and still does, in my mind, today that Martin Frias shot and murdered Ernestine Perea.
But the defense introduced some new evidence in the second trial, that Ernestine was suicidal, and that slash marks on her wrists proved she had tried to kill herself numerous times before.
I was able to document between the different stories and medical records somewhere between five and maybe a dozen prior suicide attempts or suicide gestures.
And Moxley attacked the heart of the prosecution's case.
The first point was Frias's contention that he didn't hear the gunshot from the living room.
Acoustics expert, Dr. Harry Hollien provided an explanation.
Hollien conducted a test using the body of a dead horse covered with a fabric similar to Ernestine's blouse with a 300 magnum rifle, similar to Frias's rifle.
The first shot, three feet away from the horse, was very loud.
When the gun was fired in the open, we got dB readings of somewhere between 110 and 120 dB-- and it sounded like gunfire.
But when the muscle was placed against the skin and material, it sounded very different.
The gun shot doesn't sound like gunfire.
It sounds like someone kicking the side of a building or kicking a piece of furniture.
And the energy level is quite low.
The sound was similar to what Frias described on the night of his wife's death.
Frias described on the night of his wife's death.
Judy Bunker, a blood spatter expert, analyzed the blood evidence on the wall, only 18 inches from the floor.
She says it clearly shows Ernestine was sitting on the floor with the rifle to her stomach when the shot was fired.
The bullet fragments in the wall, their location, along with the blood spatter location across the wall, and given the location of her wounds, would indicate that she was either kneeling or seated when the shot was fired.
And she found no blood spatter evidence to suggest, as prosecutors contended, that Ernestine was shot in the back, then twisted in the air while falling to the floor.
I learned from Judith Bunker that if somebody gets shot and spins around, that they spew vital fluids around.
But there was no blood spatter on the floor, walls, or the bed from the twisting motion the prosecution says occurred.
The defense theory was clearly suicide, that Ernestine held the muzzle of the rifle to her stomach with one hand, then leaned over and pushed the trigger with the other.
But prosecution experts said there was a problem with that theory.
Had this weapon had been used in contact with the body at the time of discharge that I would have expected that there would have been blood and or tissue on the muzzle of the weapon.
And there was none.
Dr. Vincent DiMaio, an expert in high velocity gunshot wounds, testified for the defense.
The absence of blood on the weapon means absolutely nothing.
Maybe half the times with handguns, you don't find blood on the muzzle.
It's a little more common in shotguns [inaudible].
But don't forget with rifles, and in this situation, you had clothing in between.
Dr. DiMaio also believes that the autopsy photos clearly show that Ernestine was shot in the stomach.
When you discharge a gun, out the muzzle of the gun comes a flame.
That's about 1,400 to 1,500 degrees.
And out comes gas.
And out comes soot, carbon, from burning gun powder.
If you put the muzzle of the gun against the body, then you're going to have the soot and the flame burns, and then the effects of gas.
If you look at the wound in the abdomen, there's soot and there's flame burns.
That means, the muzzle was in contact with the body the time of discharge.
Therefore, this has to be the entrance.
And Dr. DiMaio says the gas discharge from the rifle temporarily inflated Ernestine's abdomen with enough force that it ripped her jeans, contrary to the prosecution's claim that they were torn during a fight.
Lastly, prosecution experts testified, as they did in the first trial, that they found no gunshot residue on the blouse, supporting their claim that Ernestine was at least three feet away when the gun was fired.
The defense presented their new scanning electron microscope evidence of gunpowder residue on the blouse.
And with that, the defense rested their case.
In a moment, the verdict.
In Martin Frias's second murder trial, there were two very different theories presented to the jury.
The prosecution theory was that Martin Frias shot Ernestine in the back as she was getting up from the floor after a fight.
After the shot, Ernestine twisted as she fell to the floor, which explains why she was found on her back.
The defense maintained that Ernestine was sitting on the floor, the rifle was upside down, she used one hand to hold the muzzle against her stomach, and the other to push the trigger.
During deliberations, the jury wanted to see if a woman Ernestine's size could accomplish what the defense said happened.
And there was a small woman on the second jury.
They took the gun into the jury room.
And she sat down on the floor and replicated my theory.
And she told me later that her finger had touched that scope on that rifle exactly where Ernestine's finger print had been-- same alignment.
After 2 and 1/2 hours, the jury had a verdict, not guilty.
I don't question the wisdom of the jury.
I can see where they may not have been sure who had the accurate opinion, who had the accurate theory.
And there's no question in the criminal justice system, as it should be, that if there's a tie or even anything close to a tie that it's beyond a reasonable doubt.
And I think the jury didn't acquit Martin Frias because they felt he was innocent.
Martin Frias because they felt he was innocent.
But I believe that they acquitted because they could not find that he was guilty beyond any reasonable doubt.
I was so happy that I [inaudible] to feel like cry at same time.
We hugged each other and danced around the courtroom a little bit.
It was a good moment.
Martin Frias now lives in Southern California.
He is now an American citizen and has tried to get custody of his children, but they remain with Ernestine's mother in Wyoming.
I'm married and I got a good job.
I can't complain.
I make good money.
I got a little girl.
We enjoy life.
The forensic experts who assisted Robert Moxley in the second trial did so without remuneration.
The forensic community rallied around me in this case to make sure that I got the help I needed, to find the expertise I needed.
And there were just all kinds of people out there committed to making sure that justice got done in this case.
American justice.
It does work.
It's better than I thought.
Madalyn Murray O'Hair was America's best known atheist, principally responsible for abolishing prayer in public schools.
Madalyn, you either liked her or you hated her.
In 1995, Madalyn Murray O'Hair mysteriously disappeared from her Texas home, along with her son Jon Murray and granddaughter Robin.
Murray and granddaughter Robin.
Over $600,000 of their organization's money disappeared along with them.
What is it not to love about the story?
It involves greed.
It involves gold.
It involves the most hated woman in America.
This is a sexy story, and we should tell it.
It was a local newspaper reporter playing forensic detective who helped solve the case.
I don't remember his name.
Madalyn Murray O'Hair was often called "the most hated woman in America."
Mr. Withers, is this a form of harassment?
If it is, I will leave.
No, ma'am.
I am creating the record.
No, you're not creating the record.
You are wasting my time.
These are resp-- When you're done reading that, call me.
When you're done reading that, call me.
I'll be in the ladies room.
Is it your understanding then that you have brought no documents today?
Call me in the ladies room when you're done.
She was an avowed atheist who achieved fame in 1963 by opposing prayer in public schools.
She took her case all the way to the United States Supreme Court She founded the nonprofit group The American Atheists as well as a magazine preaching the gospel of strict separation of church and state.
She founded the nonprofit group The American Atheists as well as a magazine preaching the gospel of strict separation of church and state.
Madalyn O'Hair was a difficult woman to work with and was notorious for speaking her mind.
All right then.
Don't [bleep] with me.
I have never encountered a more bitter, more distasteful person than Madalyn Murray O'Hair.
Don't touch me.
She was extremely foul mouthed, to the point that even though we were doing an interview about something that she wanted us to do a story on, we had to stop the interview in the middle because she was cursing so much.
You have a limited opportunity this morning to ask me questions.
Why don't you get to the questions?
In August of 1995, 77-year-old Madalyn, her 40-year-old son Jon, and 30-year-old granddaughter Robin left Austin, Texas without saying a word to anyone.
Robin left Austin, Texas without saying a word to anyone.
The staff of the American Atheists organization found a note on their office door saying the O'Hairs had been called away for an emergency and didn't know when they would return.
Jon's Mercedes-Benz and Robin's Porsche were gone too.
But they left their passports behind as well as Madalyn's diabetes medicine and her three dogs.
Madalyn may not have cared very much for people, but she sure loved those dogs, we were told.
Couldn't get in touch with them, and I got concerned.
So I started making phone calls, and then I called Jon's cell phone, and that's when Madalyn answered.
I called Jon's cell phone, and that's when Madalyn answered.
But Madalyn wouldn't tell the board member Ellen Johnson where she was.
Ellen Johnson where she was.
Johnson said the calls were short and strained, and she worried that Madeline and her son were under some sort of duress.
Now, I questioned him about what was going on.
And, you know, he tried to reassure me that everything was OK, and I believed it.
Just one month later, Madalyn and Jon stopped answering their cell phone calls.
When Ellen Johnson took over the American Atheists group in Madalyn's absence, she discovered that since the O'Hairs disappeared, more than $600,000 was missing from the organization's bank account.
Suddenly you have three people and a very large amount of money all disappearing at the same time, and this makes it far more interesting.
John MacCormack covered the disappearance for the "Express News"
Among the atheists, there was a very peculiar silence, but beneath it was this very profound concern.
They were very concerned.
They didn't know what to do.
They hadn't really attempted to get any help from law enforcement.
No one associated with the American Atheists reported the three missing, and it wasn't until a year later that Bill Murray, Madalyn's estranged son, filed a missing persons report with Austin police.
Madalyn and Bill had a rocky relationship.
In 1980, on Mother's Day, Bill told Madalyn that he had embraced Christianity and was no longer an atheist.
He then went public, writing a book and making a film attacking his mother's beliefs.
My mother loved confrontations, and she never hesitated to use me as an accomplice in her schemes.
She wanted to push the school prayer issue as far as she could, so she instructed me to keep a record of prayer and Bible reading at school.
It was here in my home my mother made me a spy for the cause of atheism.
Madalyn immediately disowned him, and Bill never again spoke with his mother, his brother Jon, or his daughter Robin.
Jon, or his daughter Robin.
Bill didn't know if his family's disappearance was foul play or if they had stolen the atheist's money and fled.
A year after Madalyn Murray O'Hair disappeared with their son Jon Murray and granddaughter Robin, journalist John MacCormack learned what the American Atheists group already knew, that Jon Murray had withdrawn over $600,000 from the atheists' bank account just weeks after the three disappeared.
Atheists group already knew, that Jon Murray had withdrawn over $600,000 from the atheists' bank account just weeks after the three disappeared.
MacCormack also examined Jon's cell phone records, which indicated he had been living in San Antonio, Texas after his disappearance.
Many of the 200 calls were suspicious.
They'd been calling financial institutions.
They'd been calling airlines.
They'd been calling drugstores to get Madalyn's prescriptions.
There were more than 150 calls.
They called jewelry stores.
One of those jewelry stores was on Fredrickson Road in San Antonio.
The owner said that Jon Murray purchased $600,000 worth of gold coins using cash.
Even after Madalyn's son Bill Murray reported the three missing, the Austin police showed little interest.
There was no investigation by the Austin Police Department, it was a total joke.
The police reaction may have been based on their belief that Madalyn and her family absconded with the Atheists' money and that it was an internal matter.
How can somebody that's that famous turn up missing with all that money and still no one wants to look for her?
So I decided I'd be part of the team that went looking.
Television news reporter Valeri Williams discovered the Jon Murray sold his Mercedes-Benz for $15,000, well below the car's value, to this man, Mark Sparrow.
I'm Jon Murray.
The seller identified himself as Jon Murray, Low miles.
Low miles.
Yeah, it's 20,000.
Is that about right?
But when shown a picture of Jon Murray, Sparrow said it wasn't the man who sold him the car.
Sparrow said it wasn't the man who sold him the car.
He said his name was Jon Murray, and that's not the guy who sold me the car.
Would you mind taking a look at these mug shots for me?
After reviewing mug shot pictures, Mr. Sparrow identified the impersonator as another missing person, an ex-convict named Danny Fry.
Mr. Sparrow identified the impersonator as another missing person, an ex-convict named Danny Fry.
This was an interesting coincidence.
Danny Fry's family told police that Danny had been working with another ex-convict, David Waters, who had once worked for Madalyn O'Hair and had a falling out.
In 1993, Madalyn hired David Waters as her office manager.
Within a few months, she fired him, maintaining he had stolen $50,000 from the Atheists' organization.
Waters was charged with theft.
He accepted a plea agreement and paid the money back.
And in so doing, avoided jail time.
But Madalyn was furious that authorities allowed Waters to go free.
Using the power of the pen, Madalyn wrote an article in her magazine exposing Waters as a thief and implied Waters had homosexual relationships while serving an earlier prison sentence for assault. When Waters saw the article, friends say he vowed revenge.
Journalist John MacCormack called Waters and asked him if he had anything to do with Madalyn's disappearance.
Did you have anything at all to do with this?
I had nothing to do with this.
I didn't believe a word he said, but he spoke as though it was the truth.
MacCormack discovered that David Waters, Danny Fry, and another ex-convict Gary Karr were all working together in Austin, Texas around the time the O'Hairs disappeared in August of 1995.
And not long afterwards, a headless, pantless male torso was discovered in a Dallas river.
They'd spent three years trying to figure out who it was, but they had no fingerprints, no dental, and they had no missing persons records that matched this disappearance.
So they were totally stumped.
MacCormack had a hunch that this body was somehow connected to the O'Hairs' disappearance.
Not long after the O'Hairs disappeared, a male torso was found in a Dallas river.
Without a head or hands, fingerprints and dental records couldn't be used for identification.
Forensic anthropologists estimated the man to be between the ages of 35 and 45.
He had a stocky build and a lot of chest hair.
The description didn't fit Madalyn's son Jon.
But journalist John MacCormack had a hunch.
He told police that it might be Danny Fry, the man who had impersonated Jon Murray when selling his car.
Fry, the man who had impersonated Jon Murray when selling his car.
Murray when selling his car.
Scientists took DNA from Danny Fry's brother and compared it to the blood DNA of the torso.
It was a match.
Just as MacCormack suspected, the dead man in the river was Danny Fry.
The blockbuster was when we could write a story that said that the headless corpse in Dallas was Danny Fry, and, by the way, he was last seen with David Waters in Austin.
And by the way, he spent his last month in San Antonio at the same time the O'Hairs did.
So that really kicked in the door.
Suddenly local, state, and federal law enforcement officials took notice and joined the investigation.
When David Waters' ex-girlfriend Patti Steffens read about Danny Fry's murder in the newspaper, she immediately called the FBI.
At first she wanted to tell us small bits and pieces.
You have to understand this was a woman who was terrified.
She gave investigators an important lead.
Three years earlier she said that David Waters had rented a storage unit around the time the O'Hairs disappeared and that Waters had once gone there with this spray canister.
Laboratory tests on the canister revealed it had once contained bleach, which is sometimes used to remove blood evidence.
Armed with a search warrant, police found a tiny red stain beneath a piece of aluminum under the wall.
It was so small, it was almost invisible.
With blood from Madalyn's Bill for comparison, a mitochondrial DNA test revealed the stain was a mixture of two people-- Madalyn Murray O'Hair and her son Jon Murray.
Next the FBI searched Waters' apartment.
We found documents that belonged to the O'Hairs that were dated after David Waters had been fired from their organization.
Mr. Waters, himself a prior convicted felon, who was not allowed to have guns or ammunition, was found to be in illegal possession of about 118 rounds of handgun ammunition of three different calibers.
They even found books from the O'Hair library and a bow saw.
The FBI confronted David Waters with the forensic and physical evidence against him.
It took quite a while, but eventually, 5 and 1/2 years after the O'Hairs disappeared, Waters led investigators to a remote burial site at Camp Wood, Texas.
Forensic anthropologist Dr. David Glassman was there.
When we hit the first bone, it was kind of interesting in this case because the bone was very large, and it was the upper leg bone.
The upper leg bone is the largest bone in our skeleton.
But this one was particularly large.
After 21 hours of excavation, three adult bodies were uncovered.
In each case, the legs had been cut off, possibly to make it easier to transport the bodies.
On one of the bodies, the hair was very well intact, a female skull, and the hair was braided down the back of the neck of the individual.
There were some remnants of clothes that were found but no clothes that were intact.
There had been some effort to burn the remains, not to the point of cremation, but in order to destroy maybe the clothing or any other DNA evidence that might be there.
As the remains were unearthed, shining in the afternoon sun was the metal plate of an artificial hip.
Medical records revealed that Madalyn O'Hair had undergone hip replacement surgery several years before her disappearance.
The serial number of the hip in Madalyn's medical file matched the number on the hip in the grave.
Forensic odontologists compared the O'Hairs' dental records to the skulls in the grave and confirmed that these were the remains of Madalyn, her son Jon, and granddaughter Robin.
Jon, and granddaughter Robin.
For Jon Murray, when he was in the grave and uncovered, he did have a plastic bag over his skull.
And when the plastic bag was removed, there were small fractures that occurred to the skull itself, indicating some blunt trauma had been done to him during the time of his death.
The cause of death for Madalyn and Robin couldn't be determined by looking at the bones.
But since their heads were covered in plastic, it was assumed they were asphyxiated.
But investigators found something else-- an extra head and two extra hands.
The head showed a single gunshot wound at the base of the skull.
Forensic scientists used a photo superimposition technique for identification.
They suspected the skull was that of Danny Fry, the man whose torso was found in the Dallas river.
Scientists took a photograph of Danny Fry then photographed the skull at the same angle and size.
The two photographs were superimposed to see if the facial features matched the skull.
For example, the distance between the eyes and the shape of the nose and the distance between the nose to the teeth and the distance across the cheeks, in every area that I examined in the video superimposition matched up.
The motive for the O'Hairs' murder had been revenge.
But why had Danny Fry been murdered?
The forensic evidence found years after the O'Hairs' disappearance tied David Waters and his two associates, Danny Fry and Gary Karr, to their murders.
David Waters' girlfriend Patti Steffen told police that Waters kidnapped the O'Hairs because of the unflattering and inflammatory article Madalyn had written about him.
Madalyn had written about him.
His girlfriend said he fantasized about torturing her, cutting off her toes.
And so basically I think this whole thing came down to not just money, but really ugly personal chemistry between two dysfunctional personalities.
For David Waters, it was about revenge.
He wanted the ultimate revenge on Madalyn O'Hair, and the money was just a byproduct.
After kidnapping the O'Hairs, Waters forced Jon Murray to withdraw $600,000 from the Atheists' bank account and then took him to the jewelry store to exchange the $600,000 for gold coins.
Waters forced Jon Murray to withdraw $600,000 from the Atheists' bank account and then took him to the jewelry store to exchange the $600,000 for gold coins.
The O'Hairs were most likely dead by the time Danny Fry impersonated Jon Murray to sell his car.
Danny Fry impersonated Jon Murray to sell his car.
Thanks for letting me see it.
But why was Danny Fry killed too?
The answer was his drinking.
We knew that Danny Fry drank, and loose lips sink ships.
And by what David had told Bob Fry about his brother, and that was your brother has a big mouth, could be the thing that caused his death.
But David Waters made several crucial mistakes.
Although Waters cleaned the room with water and bleach, scientists still found a tiny speck of blood three years later, identified by mitochondrial DNA as that of Jon Murray and Madalyn O'Hair.
But removing Danny Fry's head and hands still didn't prevent identification.
DNA and skull photo superimposition were all scientists needed.
Ironically, after stealing the $600,000 from the O'Hairs, Waters never got the opportunity to enjoy the money.
Waters never got the opportunity to enjoy the money.
It was stolen from him.
Well, his first mistake was putting his money in a storage locker up in Austin and having three bozos from San Antonio, who were looking for used TVs, open up the locker with a master key and find a suitcase with a half million in gold.
For his role in this case, David Waters was sentenced to 80 years in prison.
David Waters was sentenced to 80 years in prison.
His accomplice Gary Karr was sentenced to life in prison.
Mr. Karr fully admitted his role and involvement with David Waters in the abduction, robbery, and murder of the O'Hairs.
And he indicated that he had assisted in dismembering the bodies and putting the body parts in 55 gallon drums in a storage unit here in Austin.
It was a nice neat ending.
They found the bodies.
The bad guy goes to prison.
And you know the heroes ride off into the sunset.
For his persistence, John MacCormack is one of the heroes of this case.
And forensic science played an important role too.
Well, I mean, this is definitely one that, if it wasn't for DNA, we'd probably still be scratching our heads as to who this person was.
A lot of times I kind of forget about the case when the next case comes in.
And so I really don't have one that always jumps to mind.
But I'll remember this one for a long time.
Two eyewitnesses said they saw a man in a pickup truck deliberately run over another man-- not once, but twice.
Police could not find the victim's body, or the pickup truck.
And when police tried to talk to the two eyewitnesses, they had disappeared, too.
All police could find were some blood stains in the snow.
But would this be enough to prove murder?
On January 29, 2001, a member of a motorcycle gang in Duluth, Minnesota called police to report his roommate, 27-year-old Erik Schrieffer, missing.
Minnesota called police to report his roommate, 27-year-old Erik Schrieffer, missing.
He said he hadn't seen Schrieffer for the last four days, and he was worried.
Usually that doesn't happen.
People that report missing persons usually call in within the first six to eight hours in a panic.
Well great.
I appreciate your assistance.
Have a good day.
Officer Ryan Temple was assigned to the case.
Hi, this is Officer-- I attempted to contact all the area hospitals, all the county jails in the area, the Duluth Detoxification Center.
I attempted to contact all the area hospitals, all the county jails in the area, the Duluth Detoxification Center.
Also tried to contact the victim's family-- his mother, his father.
Also, his employer.
No one had heard from Erik Schrieffer.
He worked as an apprentice for the Boilermakers Union 647.
Erik was very quiet and reserved.
Very good performance on the job site.
But he hadn't been to work, either.
Police found Schrieffer's three automobiles still in his driveway.
His wallet and winter coat were inside his house.
Police discovered that Schrieffer was last seen at a party in a motorcycle club house.
Two motorcycle club members who were at that party, Charlie Johnson and Herbert Zingle, said that Schrieffer got into an altercation with Joseph Wehmanen, a member of a rival motorcycle club.
Johnson and Herbert Zingle, said that Schrieffer got into an altercation with Joseph Wehmanen, a member of a rival motorcycle club.
Who stuck you?
Son of a bitch!
What the fuck, man?
Screw him.
Take it outside.
The two were separated and escorted outside-- Get off me, man! -It's all right.
Get off me, man! -It's all right.
Just calm down.
The witnesses say Wehmanen easily won the fight.
While Schrieffer was still on the ground, Wehmanen did the unthinkable.
Wehmanen did the unthinkable.
He got into his truck, started the engine, and intentionally ran over Schrieffer.
Amazingly, he wasn't killed.
Wehmanen then put his truck in reverse, and ran over him a second time.
Fearing for their own safety, the witnesses ran back inside.
When they looked out again, both the truck and Schrieffer were gone.
There was something more to this story than just a missing person.
The witness is admitted they were drinking heavily that night, and weren't sure of all the details.
And the alleged fight took place almost a week earlier.
And the inclement weather complicated the investigation.
There was a four day time lapse, and we had received approximately eight inches of slushy snow on-- in between time.
It made it a very difficult crime scene.
There was-- once we got there, there wasn't a whole lot to see, to start with.
When police looked into Joseph Wehmanen's background, they discovered he had never been in trouble with the law.
He was an ex-Marine, who had served during the Gulf War, and was a member of the Thunderbird motorcycle gang, although not an active member.
Investigators needed to find some forensic evidence to corroborate the witnesses' story.
Police wanted to find some way to verify the claims of two eyewitnesses that Erik Schrieffer was run over twice by Joseph Wehmanen in his truck.
From the very beginning, we had to try and put the case together to understand exactly what had happened, and then attempt to try and locate where, possibly, the body had gone to after that period of time.
So initially we were trying to put the puzzle together before we could find out where the body may have gone to.
Police set up a command post in the alley where the fight allegedly took place.
Working in subzero temperatures, officers uncovered the top layer of new snow in order to search for blood.
They were successful.
They discovered a blood trail that led from the alley all the way to the end of a parking area, nearly 80 yards away.
At the end of the trail, police found one very large pool of blood in the snow.
Due to the amount of blood that we found in that one spot, and the fact that there was no blood after that as we continued to excavate the snow past that point, we believe the body was loaded into the truck.
Medical examiner Dr. Donald Kundel was called to the scene.
Kundel was called to the scene.
A person, to produce that much blood in one localized area, had to still have their heart beating.
They may have suffered serious injuries, but their heart had to still be beating in order to produce that much blood coming from a wound.
Once the heart stops beating, a body no longer bleeds.
The blood evidence suggested that the victim was lodged under the truck, and was dragged 80 yards.
The pool of blood at the end of the trail indicated the victim was still alive, and had been picked up from the snow.
However, Doctor Kundel told police that without immediate medical attention, the victim would have died within four hours.
To collect the blood evidence, police used a standard coffee filter to separate the blood from the snow.
The filter trapped the red and white blood cells, and allowed plasma and melting snow to drip through, just as the filter traps coffee grounds, not allowing them to drip into the coffee.
Without a body, police had another problem-- how to tell whether this was the blood of Erik Schrieffer.
But police got a break.
They learned that Schrieffer had undergone hand surgery a few years earlier, when he had accidentally shot himself.
The hospital saved Schrieffer's tissue sample that had been sent to the pathology lab for analysis.
The tissue was preserved in paraffin, which halts the degenerative process, preserving the tissue indefinitely.
The blood DNA found in the snow was compared to the DNA from Schrieffer's tissue sample.
It matched.
Police canvassed area hospitals, health clinics, and doctors' offices.
No one with the type of injuries Schrieffer would have sustained had been treated.
Convinced that Erik Schrieffer could not have survived without treatment, the medical examiner signed a death certificate.
Yes, we do have a homicide, and one of the worst types for a detective to have-- a homicide without a body.
The next step was for police to speak with the driver of the truck, Joseph Wehmanen.
But he was uncooperative.
He started to shut the door on me.
At that point, I reached over and grabbed him by the shirt, informed him that he was under arrest for murder.
Police impounded Wehmanen's vehicle.
But a forensic analysis found no evidence of an accident.
They found no trace of blood, body fluids, or hair anywhere on the trunk, or underneath.
The crime lab is well-respected by law enforcement agencies in this state.
They've got the best equipment, the most sophisticated gear.
And if they couldn't find any evidence in the truck, then you started wondering, well how could that be?
How could somebody drive a truck over somebody twice, and there's no hair, no blood, nothing?
And that didn't seem right to me.
The lack of forensic evidence wasn't the only problem.
Witnesses' credibility was another.
During police questioning, both witnesses admitted they were inebriated at the time of the alleged accident.
One said, quote, "I don't remember who was at the house, who came back.
We were sitting there drinking.
I know there was people in and out.
Like I say, I'm drunk.
And Joseph Wehmanen maintained his innocence.
With two inebriated eyewitnesses, no forensic evidence in Wehmanen's truck, and no body to prove there had been a murder, prosecutors knew they didn't have enough evidence to go to trial.
Investigators needed more evidence in the Erik Schrieffer case, and the search for his body intensified.
Police decided to find out how their prime suspect, Joseph Wehmanen, spent his leisure time, and with whom?
Wehmanen, spent his leisure time, and with whom?
I came across one of his friends and asked, when's the last time you spent time with Wehmanen?
Where was that that he spent the time with him?
And it'd come to be that within the week previous, he was ice fishing with this friend.
Police had a general description of the ice house that Wehmanen and his friend used, but they weren't sure where it was located on the vast Saint Louis River.
Nevertheless, police were assigned to search the area.
He came across an ice house.
We weren't quite sure whether it was the one that we were necessary looking for.
But as he was looking into the ice house, he found a hole that was larger than your normal ice fishing hole, probably the size of one that a human could be slipped into.
An underwater dive team searched the frigid waters of the Saint Louis River for Schrieffer's body.
Conditions were miserable.
It was snowing with wind gusts up to 30 miles per hour.
Divers could stay under the freezing water for only 30 to 45 minutes before suffering hypothermia.
After days of searching, they found nothing.
Then investigators got more bad news.
Their case against Wehmanen was based almost entirely on the testimony of two eyewitnesses who claimed they saw a fight between Schrieffer and Wehmanen.
But when police went to question them further, the two had vanished.
We have actually documented testimony from family members of the two witnesses that the Thunderbirds were approached by the Hells Angels, an in turn approached the two witnesses and asked them to leave the community.
Downright threatened them.
With no body, no forensic evidence against Wehmanen, and now, no witnesses, the defense filed a motion to dismiss the case.
The prosecution was in a difficult position.
All the while, too, we're looking for the body.
And we're looking for some more physical evidence to tie Joe Wehmanen into this.
We were convinced that he was the person responsible for the death, but he wasn't saying anything.
The more police thought about Wehmanen's truck and the eyewitness testimony, the more they realized how unlikely it was that the undercarriage of his truck would be so clean, especially in the middle of winter.
In the words of investigators, it was almost too clean.
So nearly six months after the murder, they examined the truck once again.
We decided we would take the truck apart piece by piece until we were satisfied that there was no evidence to be found, or we actually found evidence.
And that's what we did.
We had a belief all along that if the truck was used in transport of the body, there always has to be some type of forensic evidence that's left behind.
Or in any kind of crime scene-- I strongly believe that there's always forensic evidence that's left behind in any crime scene.
They hoisted Wehmanen's truck up on a rack in the police garage, and bolt by bolt, they took the truck apart.
I think I used the analogy in one of my stories-- it was like they were cutting their lawn with tweezers.
They went over that vehicle inch by inch.
For over two days, police searched every inch of the vehicle.
Finally, they found their first piece of evidence-- a single strand of human hair that was attached to the front spring of the truck.
And when they removed the top covering of the truck's cargo area, they found several small blood stains in the crevices.
Police now suspected that Wehmanen power sprayed his truck after the murder, and the water pushed the victim's blood into the tiny crevices between the sheets of metal.
But scientists still needed to find out who the blood and hair belonged to.
When police found blood stains and a strand of hair in the undercarriage of Joseph Wehmanen's truck, they promptly informed Wehmanen's attorney that they would be sending the materials for forensic testing.
Once the state could tie the body to Mr. Wehmanen's truck, the case changed dramatically.
And I talked to Joe, and I told him so.
Ultimately it comes down to the old Kenny Rogers song.
You've got to know when to hold 'em, and know when to fold 'em.
And I felt it was-- when they found that blood in the truck, it was time to fold 'em.
Without even waiting for the results of the forensic testing, Wehmanen agreed to lead police to Schrieffer's body in return for a reduced charge of unintentional second degree The prosecution agreed, and Wehmanen confessed.
The prosecution agreed, and Wehmanen confessed.
It's my opinion that this forensic evidence was so powerful that Mr. Wehmanen knew what the outcome would be when we sent it to the lab, and just decided to plead guilty.
In Wehmanen's taped confession, his version differed from the eyewitnesses'.
Wehmanen admitted running over Schrieffer in the alley, but said it was an accident.
He also said he didn't realize Schrieffer was stuck under the truck until he reached the end of the parking lot.
Wehmanen said he put Schrieffer in the back of his truck, and dumped him into the river the next day.
He said the police had searched the correct spot in the Saint Louis River, but the body may have drifted.
Louis River, but the body may have drifted.
When the divers returned for a second search, they still couldn't find the body.
A few weeks later, after the plea agreement was signed, Schrieffer's body surfaced by itself on the Wisconsin side of the river.
Schrieffer's body surfaced by itself on the Wisconsin side of the river.
The autopsy revealed that the cause of death was blunt force trauma to the head.
In Wehmanen's mother's garage, police found a cinder block.
Its size and shape were consistent with Schrieffer's head injury.
Wehmanen didn't deny striking Schrieffer in the head with the block, but said he did it after Schrieffer was already dead.
Prosecutors were skeptical.
He says he hit him with a block when he was wrapping up his body at his mother's garage, and hit him with a block of cement just out of frustration, expressing anger at Erik Schrieffer for having caused him to do this.
Doesn't make a lot of sense.
Because of the plea agreement, Joseph Wehmanen was sentenced to 12 and 1/2 years in prison for Erik Schrieffer's death.
Joseph Wehmanen was sentenced to 12 and 1/2 years in prison for Erik Schrieffer's death.
He'll be eligible for parole after eight years.
12 years in prison for a murder where you drive your vehicle over a body one time, then back over it again, if the witnesses are to be believed-- to me, that's not justice.
The family wanted us to make some type of negotiation, compromise on the amount of time, in return for recovery of the body.
And I remember even telling Erik's mom and dad and brother that Joe Wehmanen is not going to get what he deserves for what he did to Erik.
I made that very clear to them.
And that's what I even told the court at sentencing.
But we were willing to make a compromise in order to recover the body and put the case behind.
The other reason for the deal was the disappearance of the two eyewitnesses.
They are still missing to this day.
I hope they are OK.
I hope nothing has happened to them.
And if we could find out who is responsible for their disappearance, for their being conveniently absent at a time when we needed them, for us having to reduce the charge for murder in the second degree intentional murder down to unintentional, we want to know.
Then there'll be a little bit of finality to this case.
The case was solved by forensic evidence Wehmanen couldn't power wash away.
Wehmanen couldn't power wash away.
Wehmanen knew that the blood found in the metal crevices and the single strand of hair were Schrieffer's, and that forensic testing would prove it.
Schrieffer's, and that forensic testing would prove it.
I strongly believe that there's always forensic evidence that's left behind in any crime scene.
It's just a matter of your human eye picking up and looking in certain places, and using the current technologies to locate that forensic evidence.
Forensic science was remarkable, because without the police department going that extra distance and finding that evidence in the truck, in the tailgate and the undercarriage, without the medical examiner finding that blood sample with the matching DNA at the end of that alley, we would have been out of luck.
In 1996, a serial rapist preyed on women young and old in South Bend, Indiana.
Eventually, three victims identified the same man as the perpetrator.
But what happens when the forensic evidence points to one man while the victims are pointing to another?
Throughout the spring and summer of 1996, police were investigating four sexual assault and burglary cases in the River Park section of South Bend, Indiana.
All of the crimes occurred on weeknights between 8:00 and 11:00 p.m, and the descriptions of the assailant were the same.
He was described as a young black male between 16 and 25 years of age, about 5 foot 8 inches tall with a thin One of the homes broken into belonged to this woman, who has asked not to be identified.
One of the homes broken into belonged to this woman, who has asked not to be identified.
It had rained.
It had stormed.
And I was in bed.
She says the perpetrator kicked in the door while she was asleep.
She says she didn't get a good look at him, since during the assault he covered her eyes with a shirt.
The first thing he said to me was, bitch, I want your money.
In this case, he assaulted her, locked her in a closet, then stole her automobile.
But he was clever and left behind very few clues.
He wore gloves so he wouldn't leave fingerprints, and he wore a hood or a mask to conceal his identity.
I just tried to remember, just do what he tells you to do and you'll be all right.
And I was.
Detective Sergeant Cindy Eastman and Anne Schellinger were investigating the crimes.
Eastman and Anne Schellinger were investigating the crimes.
There's nothing more stressful as an investigator than having a serial situation taking place, because we know until we solve this, there are going to be more victims.
Although the victims describe the assailants similarly, his MO, or method of operation, in each case was different.
When we're looking at serial offenders, usually they stick with what works for them.
They normally carry the same weapon.
They normally approach the victim in the same manner.
In some of the cases, the perpetrator used a knife.
In others, he used a handgun.
Sometimes he targeted young women on the street, and other times broke into the homes of elderly women.
In terms of forensic evidence, investigators had very little.
In one case, a semen sample.
In another, a pubic hair.
But few other clues.
The River Park Rapist's most brazen crime happened in July of 1996.
The victims were a young man and his fiance.
They were having an argument.
They decided to stop the car, get out, just cool off, talk it out.
Seemingly out of nowhere, the assailant demanded money at gunpoint.
He struck the young man and took off with the woman, sexually assaulting her in a wooded area nearby.
When the police arrived, their canine unit, armed the assailant's scent, identified a trail.
The dog walked past the tree line where the assault took place and continued into a field.
At the spot where the dog lost the scent, police noticed bicycle tire impressions in the grass, raising the possibility that he had used a bicycle to make his getaway.
Police staked out the neighborhood, looking for men on bicycles who fit the assailant's description.
It wasn't long before a suspect rode right into their trap.
Scores of police officers in South Bend, Indiana searched the River Park area in a hunt for the River Park Rapist.
They were looking for a young black male living in the general vicinity of the crimes who was using a bicycle as his method of transportation.
During a stakeout three months into the crime spree, a police officer saw a young black man matching the victim's description riding a bicycle just across the street from one of the crime scenes.
The suspect was identified as 31-year-old Richard Alexander.
Although he had previous brushes with the law, Alexander denied he was the River Park Rapist.
Alexander denied he was the River Park Rapist.
He claimed he was in the wrong place at the wrong time.
I ain't did nothing, man.
On my way home.
Everybody in the area-- it's a quiet neighborhood, whatever, know what I'm sayin'?
I'm the only black going down the street on a brand new mountain bike.
They see him riding his bike late.
They saw that like a scapegoat.
There go a black man.
Let's throw this on him.
A search of Alexander's apartment found a knife, some hoods, and bandanas.
At police headquarters, investigators placed Alexander's picture along with five others in a photographic lineup and asked the couple who had been attacked if their assailant was among them.
You don't recognize anyone?
The woman could not identify a subject.
How about you?
That guy.
This guy here?
That's the one.
But her fiance dead.
I'm absolutely certain.
He looked at the photo, and without hesitation pointed to the picture of Richard Alexander as being the suspect that robbed them and sexually assaulted the victim.
This was the only positive identification.
The other victims couldn't say for sure.
But soon, they would get a second chance.
Police arranged for another lineup, this time with the suspects in person.
Once again, there were six suspects to choose from.
Number six, step forward and read the lines, please.
The first to step onto the stage was Richard Alexander.
Reportedly, one of the victims gasped when they saw him walk out, and perhaps even cried.
Number three, step forward and say your line.
Each of the suspects was instructed to repeat phrases that the rapist had used during his attacks.
Bitch, I want your money.
Where your car keys at?
Don't talk.
I want your money.
After hearing his voice, two female victims identified Alexander as the rapist, bringing the number of identifications to three.
Next, forensic scientists analyzed the pubic hair found at one of the crime scenes.
Since it didn't have a root, it could not be used for DNA testing.
The only option was to compare it to Richard Alexander's hair visually to see if they looked similar.
The comparison was inconclusive.
Scientists also had a semen sample from one of the victims who had been unable to identify Alexander from the police lineup.
When that sample was tested for DNA, it did not match Richard Alexander.
So he was not charged for that crime.
But he was charged with rape, confinement, burglary, and theft in the three other cases.
At the trial, the prosecution failed to make their case to the jury.
Barbara Griffin was one of the 12 jurors.
I've been working public servant since '67.
So I kind of get a feel for people.
And I just on the fourth day, I got a feeling that this man didn't do this.
There were nine white and three black.
Nine whites said guilty.
Two blacks said guilty, but of a lesser sentence.
And I said not guilty.
So I was the only holdout.
And the jury was hung.
Y'all got the wrong person.
Four months later, Alexander was tried a second time with a jury composed entirely of white men and women.
Based on the three victims' identifications, Richard Alexander was found guilty of two of the three assaults.
Richard Alexander was found guilty of two of the three assaults.
He was sentenced to 70 years in prison.
We were just so devastated, and just depressed.
Because we knew in our heart, he was innocent.
I was crying, you know what I'm saying?
Because of the way they did me, you know what I'm saying?
Just took me off the street, took my life from me.
Barbara Griffin could not believe the news.
I was so angry.
I was just angry.
I felt like this was another black man going to prison.
I felt that way.
Even Officer Eastman had her doubts.
I was sorry and somewhat surprised to hear that the jury did convict.
I was very conflicted.
I had my doubts, but I could not prove it.
With Alexander behind bars, police assumed the River Park rapes were over.
But they were wrong.
Had the authorities jailed the wrong man?
Richard Alexander says the first year in prison was the hardest.
But the second, third, and fourth years behind bars weren't a lot easier.
There is a pecking order in prison.
Murderers and thieves are held in higher regard than child molesters and rapists.
Alexander says he saw more violence inside the prison than he ever saw outside.
I was afraid that I was going to get killed.
I've seen guys get raped in the shower.
Some guy gets raped.
In in the shower taking a shower, and they got this homosexual in there-- look like a girl, know what I'm sayin'?
And you got about two guys in there.
So I hurried up and got out of there.
They boy was in there knocked out, and they found him laying in the shower.
The guy was dead, blood everywhere.
Alexander did what many inmates do.
He wrote letters to everyone he could think of proclaiming his innocence and asking for another trial, with no success.
Meanwhile, the burglaries and sexual assaults continued-- this time, not in the River Park section but just a short distance away.
And one of those victims identified Richard Alexander's picture from a photo lineup as the assailant.
Richard Alexander's picture from a photo lineup as the assailant.
You're absolutely certain?
Even though Alexander was in prison.
Detective Ryan Harmon was assigned to investigate these new cases, and noticed similarities with the earlier cases.
I didn't investigate the River Park rapes in 1996, so I became a lot more familiar with what happened that night.
The search for the perpetrator took an unexpected turn in April of 2000, when a man called police to say there was a tan Cadillac in his driveway and there was a burglar inside.
When the intruder saw the homeowner, he fled on foot.
In the foyer was a clear impression, which was collected for analysis.
In the assailant's car, police found everything they needed.
I found utility bills, some receipts, different pieces of paper that showed Michael Murphy's name on there, as well as a specific address and apartment number.
A background check revealed Michael Murphy had been implicated for sexually assaulting his girlfriend's 9-year-old niece.
9-year-old niece.
Yeah, he touched her.
What actually stopped him from actually going through with it was his pager went off, she said.
Detective Harmon interviewed both Murphy's girlfriend and the little girl's mother.
Well, these two girls just went off two hours about all these different types of burglaries he had committed.
Michael thought he was big and bad, and thought he was cool or what he was doing, getting away with what he was doing.
With a search warrant, investigators discovered a pair of shoes in Murphy's closet which matched the shoe impression at the burglary scene.
Murphy's girlfriend gave police some pictures of Murphy with some of the items he had stolen in the burglaries.
When confronted with the evidence, Murphy said little.
He'd say, hey, when I'm all hyped up on cocaine, I need to go out and just find a girl.
I need to go out and just find a girl.
Things like that told me that he may be a sex offender.
Harmon then called the first investigator of the River Park rapes to ask whether she had ever heard of Michael Murphy.
Park rapes to ask whether she had ever heard of Michael Murphy.
He'd been arrested by me the month prior, so we began working together at that point on Murphy and various other crimes that he had been involved in.
When Cindy Eastman saw the photographs given to police by Murphy's girlfriend, she saw an important clue.
In one of the pictures was a chrome and glass wall clock stolen during a sexual assault in 1997, a crime that Richard Alexander was suspected of committing.
Eastman immediately phoned Murphy's girlfriend.
She immediately said, I know exactly what you're talking about.
I remember when he came home with it.
It's hanging on my wall.
Do you want it?
Cindy revisited that victim and asked her, do you have any photographs that may depict the same clock?
And she had a photograph of her and her son during the holidays standing in front of this clock.
Both detectives began to suspect that the real River Park rapist wasn't Richard Alexander, but Michael Murphy.
Alexander, but Michael Murphy.
They just needed some way to prove it.
During Richard Alexander's trial five years earlier, the pubic hair found on one of the victims could not be tested for DNA, since there was no root material on the hair shaft.
But science had changed in the five years since Alexander's conviction.
In 1996, forensic scientists began using a new test to look for DNA in a shaft of hair.
The new test was called mitochondrial DNA.
Mitochondrial DNA has given us tremendous power in forensic casework to solve the casework where no other DNA profile can be obtained.
It exists outside of the cell's nucleus.
Although it is not as precise as nuclear DNA, it still can provide much genetic information.
Technicians clean the hair with chemical solutions which purify the DNA sample.
The second step is to amplify it, or to make enough copies to analyze.
The mitochondrial DNA from the hair was compared to both Richard Alexander as well as Michael Murphy.
The DNA from the pubic hair did not match Richard Alexander, but it did match Michael Murphy.
We determined that at every place that we tested these two samples, at all on average 800 bases that we compared they were identical to each other.
I got the word, and it was just absolutely exhilarating.
We knew then that Richard Alexander was going to be released from prison.
Next, scientists performed DNA testing of the second piece of evidence from the River Park rapes, semen from the rape test kit.
In yet another surprise, the DNA did not match Michael Murphy as investigators assumed it would.
The DNA profile was then entered into the DNA database of convicted sex offenders in the state of Indiana.
And there was another surprise.
It matched a third man, a convicted sex offender, Mark Williams.
And there we have it.
We have the two suspects, and now it all makes sense.
Ironically, Richard Alexander, Michael Murphy, and Mark Williams looked similar.
Mark Williams looked similar.
All three of these pictures showed a male black who appeared to be within a close age range.
All three had similar musculature and statures.
All three of them had similar complexions and bone structure.
And they did resemble each other-- which again, answered the other mystery in this case.
When confronted with the mitochondrial DNA evidence, Michael Murphy confessed.
Michael Murphy confessed.
He was just doing nothing but burglarizing homes every day throughout the whole city.
Looking back, I think he's in well over 200 or 250 that I know of that he's confessed to.
Ironically, Michael Murphy and his girlfriend, who knew nothing about the sexual assaults, followed the River Park rape cases on television.
One time we were sitting at home watching TV, and they showed the guy, Alexander.
I made a comment about, that's said what he'd done.
And if he done it, I hoped-- I told her, I said, I hope they kill him, put him under.
I hope they kill him, put him under.
And Michael said, oh, they ain't gonna find nothing now.
He ain't do them rapes.
In the face of this new DNA evidence, Richard Alexander was released from prison after serving five years and four months for crimes he did not commit.
Richard Alexander was released from prison after serving five years and four months for crimes he did not commit.
Oh, it was cheers.
Everybody stood up and cheered and hugged him, and we got in the car and went on home.
It was so gratifying to me when afterward, he came up to me and I held my hand out but he hugged me and he thanked me.
And that's all that needed to be said.
It just solidified all the work.
It was like going into a card game when you know you've got a royal flush, and what's going to beat it?
It still hurts.
It still hurts, because really, nothing's been done since I've been out.
I wanted the apology.
They apologized, but it any really nothing-- taking a man's life.
Five-and-a-half years of your life taken from your family, loved ones, kids.
That still hurts.
Michael Murphy was convicted of one count of burglary and one count of sexual molestation.
He was sentenced to 30 years in prison.
Mark Williams was convicted of one count of rape and sentenced to 40 years in prison.
Richard Alexander was a victim of mistaken identity.
His innocent bicycle ride past the crime scene cost him his freedom.
Now, science had vindicated him.
Sometimes one tiny hair can say more about guilt or innocence than a handful of eyewitnesses.
In 1996, Seattle police faced an unusual challenge.
A severely wounded dog witnessed the murder of his two owners.
Could the dog identify the killers?
And if so, how?
December 9, 1996.
Seattle, Washington.
It was going to be a special day for 22-year-old Raquel Rivera.
She was starting a new job as a receptionist in a downtown office.
I seen her the night before.
And she was really excited about it.
She was a little sick.
But she was worried about she was going to make it to work She was real excited.
She was real excited.
Raquel shared this house in Seattle's South Park section with her longtime boyfriend, Jay Johnson.
Jay Johnson.
The two had been together since high school, and were talking about getting married.
I loved Jay.
He was a great guy.
I loved him.
He was very good to my daughter.
They were good for each other.
Just after dawn, neighbors heard gunshots coming from the couple's home.
Probably about four or five shots, then a break, and then maybe about six more shots.
When police arrived, they found the front door off its hinges.
The windows had been shattered by bullets.
Inside were two bodies.
The only thing we have right now is that we found two people in the house-- a male and a female, both shot.
Raquel Rivera's mother, who lived only a block away, got the phone call every parent dreads.
When I got there, there was police and everybody.
They wouldn't let me in the apartment.
And I said, that's gotta be Raquel.
The bodies were positively identified as Raquel and Jay.
The couple's dog, Chief, a six-month-old Labrador mix, was also shot.
I poked my head around the corner, saw that the dog was up against the door.
He was obviously in pain.
He was growling.
There were blood traces all over the door where he had smeared blood against that wall.
I said, let's bet everybody out.
Get animal control in here.
And get the dog out.
This particular case would rate as probably the most severely injured dog that we've ever seen from a gun shot, just by virtue of the fact that it received such a full-on frontal bullet right through the front of the nose.
Unfortunately, despite undergoing emergency surgery, the dog died.
An autopsy was performed.
It revealed the dog had been shot twice-- a non-fatal shot in the shoulder, and the bullet through his muzzle.
You could liken it to running face first into the front end of a truck bumper on that in terms of this, given what we could see in terms of the bullet trauma that it did to the front of his muzzle and his face.
The evidence told homicide investigators that the killer was searching for something.
Cabinets had been gone through.
Doors had been opened.
The bed was tossed around.
So clearly the perpetrators wanted to find something, not just eliminate the lives of witnesses therein.
But they were after something.
There was no finesse to this.
It was a blitz-style attack.
They're in.
They shoot.
They shoot the dog.
The shoot the owners of the dog.
Mr. Johnson was shot several times in the legs, which is indicative of someone trying to extract information before.
The coroner would later describe the murders as execution style killings.
The entire community was asking who would have killed this young couple who had no known enemies.
The only clues to the murder of Jay Johnson and Raquel Rivera were a smeared footprint at the couple's front door, and some 9-millimeter shell casings.
Blood spatter was on the walls, floor, and on the inside of the door.
Police discovered that a 15-year-old boy living across the street in an apartment building had seen the shooting.
This person described them as Samoan males, dressed in black.
Very large men.
And one wearing a bandana.
The boy said the two men kicked open the front door, shot the dog, and then moved into the house.
The witness could no longer see them.
But he heard the firing.
He saw the dog.
He heard two shots.
And he heard the barking.
And then he heard the dog's yelping and the dog's screams.
The boy said the men left minutes later and drove away in a red Camaro, driven by a third Samoan man.
Police suspected the men were members of a local gang-- Mad Pack.
There's a large Samoan community in Seattle are law-abiding, hardworking people.
But with every group, you've got a criminal element.
And the Mad Pack made up a large portion of their criminal element.
They were a gang in the sort of worst sense of the word.
Just three days earlier in Seattle's Chinatown, there had been a similar shooting.
The victim, Johnny Paik, survived the attack.
That being a Samoan male sitting in a red car, a very large Samoan male.
Shell casings from the Chinatown shooting were compared to those taken from Jay and Raquel's apartment.
They matched.
Police now scoured the city looking for any Samoans driving a red Camaro.
Amazingly, they didn't have to look far.
On the afternoon following Jay and Raquel's murder, police noticed a red Camaro slowly driving past the murder scene.
Driving back to the crime scene and checking things out is not an uncommon thing for a suspect to do.
It's the old return to the scene of the crime cliche.
And it happens.
The driver of the red Camaro was Charles Niko, a known member of the Mad Pack gang.
Although Niko denied any involvement in the shooting, the 15-year-old eyewitness identified him as the driver of the getaway vehicle.
When threatened with the death penalty, Niko finally told police what happened.
Niko finally told police what happened.
He said the motive was drugs.
The Mad Pack gang members heard that Jay and Raquel had cocaine in their house.
And they decided to steal it.
But after breaking in, the couple said they had no cocaine.
And then the men started shooting.
Niko identified the shooters as 22-year-old Kenneth Leuluaialii, whose street name was Sable Claus, and 24-year-old George Tuilefano, whose street name was Scoopy.
Leuluaialii, whose street name was Sable Claus, and 24-year-old George Tuilefano, whose street name was Scoopy.
Sable Claus, and 24-year-old George Tuilefano, whose street name was Scoopy.
Both were high-ranking members of the Mad Pack gang.
I already knew who they were, because you know, they ran around South Park.
They were bullies.
They were always beating everybody up.
Both men denied any involvement in the shooting, and said they had alibis.
A search of their apartment did not produce the 9-millimeter murder weapon.
The smeared footprint on the front door could not be matched to either suspect.
And eight red stains found on the right sleeve of Sable Claus' jacket was sent for DNA testing.
But it wasn't the victim's blood.
They had a result that is not human-based, because the genotype does not come back to genes associated with a human being at all.
They then are scratching their heads with, hey, what's going on here?
In fact, investigators weren't sure what it was.
With no forensic evidence to tie the suspects to the crime, Seattle police feared a conviction might be impossible.
Seattle police feared a conviction might be impossible.
As Jay Johnson and Raquel Rivera were laid to rest side-by-side in a Seattle cemetery, their families demanded justice.
To decipher exactly what happened at the crime scene, investigator O'Keefe needed to distinguish between the dog's blood spatter and that of Jay and Raquel.
I requested through my sergeant Cindy Tallman that an officer follow the dog to the vet and draw blood from the dog immediately.
My thinking at the time was to differentiate between the human blood at the scene and the dog blood.
The blood spatter and bullet casings in the apartment and the eyewitness account of the 15-year-old boy who lived across the street gave police a rough idea of what had happened.
After the intruders kicked open the door, The dog was shot in the shoulder.
The dog was shot in the shoulder.
Then the men went into the bedroom where they shot Raquel.
They took Jay into an adjoining room and shot him in the leg while demanding the couple's cocaine.
One of the men left to shoot Raquel once more.
And when Jay said the couple never had any drugs, they killed him.
Despite his shoulder wound, Chief again tried to protect his owners, and ran into the bedroom to attack the killers.
Chief again tried to protect his owners, and ran into the bedroom to attack the killers.
But why wasn't the victims' blood on the suspects' clothes?
Investigators say both Jay and Raquel were shot from a distance, and were also wearing clothes-- pajamas and t-shirts, which absorbed the blood spatter.
But with Chief, there was nothing to absorb the blood.
He was short haired, and had not long hairs around the muzzle or face or neck area.
So any kind of serious wound causing a lot of blood is obviously going to spill or spray or go off.
It's not going to cling to the coat because there's such a short, smooth coat.
It's going to roll right off.
Chief was very close to Kenneth when he was shot.
And we know also that Chief was shot in the muzzle area.
Now police discovered the possible key to the mysterious red stains on the right sleeve of Sable Claus' jacket.
Detective O'Keefe and myself decided to see if we're dealing with a non-human source.
Namely, a dog.
So with that, we needed to seek out laboratories that do DNA testing with non-humans.
And through some research, we came upon a lab in a Davis, California headed by Dr. Joy Halverson.
California headed by Dr. Joy Halverson.
Dr. Joy Halverson is an expert in investigating the parentage of world class show dogs.
Championship caliber show dogs can be worth thousands of dollars.
And where there's money, there's often corruption.
Dishonest breeders engage in a practice known as litter loading, where pups from inferior dogs are mixed in with pups from champion dogs and sold at inflated prices.
Knowledgeable buyers now analyze the DNA profiles of their new pups in order to confirm their dogs' championship parentage.
Dog DNA is exactly like human DNA.
The only difference would be we use a different set of DNA markers.
But in terms of its chemical properties and the way it behaves with these testing procedures, it's exactly the same.
Police suspected the red spots on Sable Claus' right sleeve came from the victim's dog, Chief.
Dr. Halverson cut out a piece of the sleeve with the red stains on it and analyzed it with a PCR-based DNA test.
A little piece of that fabric is taken and put into a tube.
And various buffers and so on are added to it.
Blood cells will come off the fabric into the liquid.
And then the various treatments are done to extract the DNA from that.
The results were consistent with the blood from a dog.
But was the blood from the victim's dog, Chief?
Dr. Halverson compared the DNA markers from the blood on the suspect's sleeve to the blood taken from Chief during his autopsy.
The result was a perfect match.
The blood on Sable Claus' right sleeve was the blood of Chief.
Prosecutor Tim Bradshaw knew he'd face a challenge from defense lawyers.
We were unable to find any other case-- homicide case in the country-- where canine-based DNA had been admitted into evidence.
The defense lawyers not only would challenge the admissibility of the canine DNA evidence, they described it as hocus pocus, and boldly predicted their clients would walk free.
The two gang members charged with killing Jay Johnson and Raquel Rivera were facing first degree murder charges.
Jay Johnson and Raquel Rivera were facing first degree murder charges.
Prosecutors not only had the teenaged eyewitness from across the street who identified the two in a police lineup, they also had DNA evidence from the victim's dog on Kenneth Leuluaialii's sleeve.
Also on his sleeve were hairs.
They were not human.
But they were compared to Chief's hair, and found to be consistent.
This wasn't as good as the DNA evidence, but certainly wouldn't hurt the prosecution's case.
The main suspect, Kenneth Leuluaialii became so disruptive he had to be restrained in a wheelchair for the eight-week trial.
He taunted the judge, the family members, saying he'd never get convicted.
Every time we'd walk in, he would just look at us and laugh at us.
Throw kisses at us when the girls would walk in.
I just-- I hated it.
I hate him.
Prosecutors presented their theory of how the murders were committed based on the blood spatter evidence.
Prosecutors believe that the suspects kicked open Jay and Raquel's door, and immediately were confronted by the dog, Chief.
Jay and Raquel's door, and immediately were confronted by the dog, Chief.
They shot the dog in the shoulder.
Where are the drugs at?
Tell me where the drugs are!
Where are the drugs?
I'm gonna kill you!
Where are the drugs?
I don't have any drugs.
After killing both Rachel and Jay, Chief once again tried to protect his owners.
Chief once again tried to protect his owners.
Chief was shot at point blank range.
The blowback blood spatter landed on Ken's right sleeve.
When presented with the DNA evidence linking Ken's jacket to the dog, the judge ruled that legally the animal DNA was the same as human DNA.
If the testing was the same, then so was its value as evidence.
We took advantage of the fact that the sciences is no different than the human testing that's done now in the forensic community.
And there's really nothing groundbreaking about it.
It's just a different set of DNA markers developed for dogs.
It was the first time animal DNA was used in the United States as evidence in a criminal case.
DNA was used in the United States as evidence in a criminal case.
Kenneth Leuluaialii took the stand and said he had an explanation for the dog blood on his sleeve.
He told the jurors that a few nights prior to the murders he was at a dance club in Tacoma, got into a fistfight with another man there.
And that thereby explains the blood.
That did give me an opportunity to ask him whether the man he was fighting with had hit him with a dog.
And he really couldn't explain that.
After 12 hours of deliberation, the jury sentenced both men to life in prison without parole.
Kenneth Leuluaialii laughed as the verdict was read.
But the last laugh was reserved for Chief, the victims' courageous dog.
Had if few puns about our case and Chief.
But the third victim here, Chief, was exceedingly important to our case.
And we're grateful to that.
But we're also-- this will sound a little hokey-- but grateful to the scientific community for making a contribution to justice.
And that's exactly what happened here.
Jay and Raquel had bought Chief for protection.
Little did they know that he would someday bring their killers to justice.
One piece of evidence-- the one victim who could never speak-- ended up providing perhaps the most eloquent of testimony.
And that was from the DNA profile that clearly placed defendant Leuluaialii at the crime scene.
The verdict brought small satisfaction to Raquel's mother, who now makes a point of keeping a dog around the house.
Her only child, who she raised by herself, is dead for no reason, leaving a great void in her life that no amount of justice can ever fill.
We were so close, her and I, as she was growing up.
Just her and I.
What I learned from this case is that if it's alive, it has DNA.
Detectives can use DNA in their cases in ways that we never thought of 10 years ago.
There's plant DNA.
There's animal DNA.
Every domestic animal has a DNA data bank now.
The Department of Interior has a laboratory where they do DNA on wild species.
Just from my own experience of owning animals, I mean I'm sure if I looked on my clothing right now, I'd find some animal hairs.
I mean I'm sure if I looked on my clothing right now, I'd find some animal hairs.
I'd find some animal hairs.
And if somebody kidnapped me and put me in the trunk of their car, probably a few of those hairs would end up on the trunk of their car.
So if someone's being alert and thinking about these things, I think they're valuable sources of evidence.
I think they're valuable sources of evidence.
And so it's a constant reminder for investigators to be vigilant in your approach to any sort of crime scene, and to be quite open-minded and imaginative about what application you can do as far as what science is available, because to a large degree, science is leading the way.
And we got to keep up.
In Philadelphia, a woman's car was found abandoned on the side of a busy highway, still running, but the driver was missing.
At the scene, police found several clues.
But was there enough forensic evidence to solve the mystery?
Route 476 is one of several highways that links Philadelphia to the suburbs.
Hundreds of thousands of commuters travel that road every day.
On June 20th, 1996, at 2 o'clock in the morning, an off-duty ambulance crew spotted an abandoned car along an exit ramp of 476.
The engine was running.
The lights were on.
The radio was blaring.
The driver's door was open, but no one was inside.
There was a tire iron found in front of the car.
I found some blood in front of the car.
I found a stone with blood on it in front of the car, and on the guardrail there appeared to be some blood splattered next to the car.
We later had an interpretation done of the blood pattern in front of the car, and we learned that it appeared as though someone had been laying on the ground for a brief time in front of the car.
The crime scene says that this person was violently attacked in a very fast mode, meaning that they were hit very quickly, as far as the violence was concerned, and then they were extricated from that site very quickly.
This person didn't stay around long.
Next to the car was a tire impression, which was photographed for analysis.
A forensic expert then made a cast of the impression, which was sent to the state crime lab.
The automobile was registered to Gail Willard, but had been driven at night by her daughter, 22-year-old Aimee Willard, a star soccer and lacrosse player at George Mason University in Virginia.
Willard, a star soccer and lacrosse player at George Mason University in Virginia.
Aimee was spending the summer at home with her family, who lived just a few miles from where the car was discovered.
Aimee told her mother she was going to Smokey Joe's Bar.
And her friend said Aimee left the bar alone at 1:30 in the morning.
She had never been to Smokey Joe's before.
When she came home, she very rarely went out and met people because of the fact of the time constraints on when she was home.
When she was home, she kind of stayed around here, and we hung out together and things like that.
Damage to the vehicle led police to think that Aimee may have been the victim of a carjacking.
There was an abrasion on the back bumper that was not there when Aimee drove off in the car.
I noticed it because it was my car, and I knew everything about my car.
And I had pointed it out to the police.
Possibly at that traffic light, right where she was going to turn off the 476 off-ramp onto the Route 1 on-ramp, there's a traffic light right there.
I believe that that's where he would have bumped her car.
She immediately pulls over onto the ramp, gets out of her car to exchange information.
The next morning, about a half mile from where Aimee's car was abandoned, police found a pair of panties and sneakers.
Aimee's car was abandoned, police found a pair of panties and sneakers.
They brought them down for me to identify them, and they definitely were her sneakers and panties.
They definitely were.
The panties weren't soiled with dirt.
They weren't wet.
They were dry, as were the shoes.
It appeared to me as though those items had been brought back after the rain, which would have meant that they were brought back after her car was found.
An indication the abductor had returned to the scene of the crime to dispose of the items.
Detectives screened video surveillance tapes from stores and bank ATMs near Smokey Joe's Bar, but Aimee had not stopped at any of these locations.
Then an unexpected lead fell right into investigators' laps.
Aimee Willard's car was found abandoned on a Blue Route off-ramp in Marble Township.
After Aimee Willard disappeared, police appealed to the community, asking anyone with information to come forward.
One of those who responded was 23-year-old Andrew Kobak, who said he had been driving on Route 476 on the night Aimee disappeared and saw something suspicious in the vicinity of Aimee's car.
Police knew Kobak.
Years earlier, he had been accused of impersonating a police officer.
Police say Kobak would turn a siren on, instruct the driver to pull over, and then show the driver a badge.
Do you know why I pulled you over, ma'am?
A motorist turned him in, but he was never charged.
There's a stop sign back there.
You went right through it.
Kobak immediately became a suspect, since investigators now thought he might have done the same thing with Aimee Willard.
By virtue of placing himself back at the scene, it was consistent with what is oftentimes a characteristic of people who commit crimes that are being investigated.
Out of curiosity or some other kind of motivation, they return to the vicinity of the crime, in essence, to get a feel for what's going on.
Less than 24 hours after Aimee Willard disappeared, children playing in a deserted lot in North Philadelphia discovered the nude body of a woman.
I sniffed, and I smelled something.
Then I saw it, and I ran.
There was a Nike logo tattooed on her ankle, which Aimee's parents identified.
Aimee's parents identified.
That was the hardest day of the whole thing, not knowing where she was.
There was more of a relief when they found her body in Philadelphia, that I had her back, that we could help to find out what happened to her.
Nobody could bring her back to life, but at least I had her.
An autopsy revealed that the 5 foot 2, 120-pound woman died from multiple blunt force injuries to her head and face.
120-pound woman died from multiple blunt force injuries to her head and face.
The medical examiner estimated she died at 7 o'clock in the morning, about 5 hours after she was abducted.
This is a crime of momentary passion, or a crime between two people that know each other, but somebody that actually hunted down, stalked somebody, committed the murder, the crime, and then we went to another location to try to deposit the evidence and throw the authorities off the trail.
The examiner determined that Aimee had been sexually assaulted.
DNA evidence from the rape test kit was sent to the forensics lab for testing.
We had essentially the genetic fingerprint of our murderer, and we just needed to identify that person.
The coroner also described an unusual pattern on Aimee's upper body, but police weren't sure what caused the mark.
Meanwhile, forensic experts completed their analysis of the tire impressions found at the crime scene.
They were from a Firestone 440 13-inch tire, often found on small, compact cars.
Andrew Kobak's automobile did not have those tires, and a search of his home turned up nothing.
Kobak was officially eliminated as a suspect when his DNA profile did not match the semen from the rape test kit.
With no other leads, the killer's trail turned cold.
Then, one year after Aimee Willard's death, 19-year-old Patty Jordan reported an attempted carjacking to police.
19-year-old Patty Jordan reported an attempted carjacking to police.
She said it was a man who had followed her after she left a local nightclub.
And at the next light, that car must have made the light, and I didn't.
And that's where he hit my car.
I just went, and he motioned for me to pull over.
And I was like, you hit my car.
And he was just like, pull over.
Pull over.
And it turned green, and I just kept on going.
And my headlights shone on his license plate, and that's how I got his license plate.
Fortunately, Patty had memorized the license plate number.
The vehicle was registered to 38-year-old Arthur Bomar.
20 years earlier, in 1978, Bomar had been convicted of second-degree murder in Nevada and was sentenced to life in prison.
Unbelievably, he was released on parole after serving only 11 years.
Where the mentality was in all that by the parole board in the state he came from, I really don't know.
Let me tell you something.
There are people that cannot be reformed, and no matter what you do, they will not change.
And Arthur Bomar is one of those people.
Bomar had a 20-year history of problems with the law, including several assaults on young women.
This is a guy who really hates women and despises them and wants to punish them and wants to feel virile and feels that he deserves this.
This is his way of getting back.
Investigators learned that the day Aimee Willard disappeared, Philadelphia police pulled Bomar over for questioning on an unrelated matter.
He had been stopped roughly six blocks away from the scene where her body was found, so he was someone that we certainly wanted to talk to and we were attempting to locate.
Police went to interview Bomar about the Aimee Willard case, but they couldn't find him.
Bomar about the Aimee Willard case, but they couldn't find him.
So the search was on.
A year after Aimee Willard's murder, there had been another attempted carjacking in Philadelphia.
Information provided by the victim identified the culprit as an ex-convict, Arthur Bomar, but police couldn't find him.
Not long afterwards, another woman called police to report a man trying to break into her third-floor apartment.
The man was arrested and identified himself as Peter Thomas Love.
In his pocket was a set of car keys to a Honda automobile.
They determined that there was a Honda nearby.
They ran that tag, and they learned that that tag belonged to Arthur Bomar, assigned to a 1993 Ford Escort owned by Arthur Bomar.
Escort owned by Arthur Bomar.
Police also discovered that Peter Thomas Love was an alias.
He was, in fact, Arthur Bomar.
But why was Bomar's license plate on a Honda and not on his 1993 Ford Escort?
The answer was simple.
The car was stolen.
It belonged to Maria Cabuenos, a 25-year-old woman who had been missing for three months.
Mary Cabuenos was a young woman who lived in the city of Philadelphia who was reported missing by her family.
She was supposed to appear at work one morning and failed to appear.
Investigators believe that Cabuenos was abducted while driving on Route 476, the same highway where Aimee Willard had been attacked.
Willard had been attacked.
Dried blood was found in the trunk on Maria's car, which Bomar was driving.
Both bumpers were slightly scraped, like Aimee Willard's car.
Bomar immediately became a suspect in Maria's disappearance.
Now more than ever, police believed he might have been involved in Aimee Willard's murder.
Come with me to prison.
I'll tell you all what you want to know, but I don't think it's fair to put me on TV.
And I'm not being charged with anything.
His alibi was that he was present at a birthday party and not outside the bar that Aimee was that evening.
He had been with a family.
It was not a family, it was a young woman that he was seeing.
This woman had a child.
But Bomar's fiance contradicted that.
She said Bomar was at Smokey Joe's Bar on the night Aimee Willard disappeared.
Police re-examined the evidence, looking for any clues that would tie Bomar to the murder.
One year after her daughter's death, Gail Willard, who worked as an emergency room nurse, asked to see pictures of Aimee's injuries.
Gail Willard, who worked as an emergency room nurse, asked to see pictures of Aimee's injuries.
I looked at the picture of what they were calling a diamond-shaped pattern, and I said, this isn't a diamond-shaped pattern.
This is a burn.
And it was not a burn from a flame.
It was either a burn that her body came in contact with something that had the ridges on it, but it was a burn imprint.
And it was uneven.
Investigators immediately search for Bomar's Ford Escort, the car he was driving at the time Aimee disappeared, but they got bad news.
Ford Escort, the car he was driving at the time Aimee disappeared, but they got bad news.
The car had been involved in an automobile accident a few months after Aimee's disappearance.
So they tracked the towing company and asked where that car was towed to.
They went to a location and found a car that was the green Ford Escort that had been actually sitting in a field next to this tow truck company for almost a year's time.
So there is a potential piece of great evidence that has not had the chance to be forensically analyzed.
An external examination of the Escort showed slight damage to the front bumper.
At least one of the car's tires was a Firestone 440 13-inch tire, the same type of tire which made the impression found at the crime scene.
13-inch tire, the same type of tire which made the impression found at the crime scene.
Our latent print examiner in Harrisburg was able to say that the tire was not only consistent in make, model, size, but also in wear, which is helpful.
It's another piece to the puzzle, so the forensics in our case were absolutely critical.
Bomar's car had been exposed to the elements, without its roof, for almost a year, so it was no surprise that police could find no trace of blood inside the car.
In a previous employment, he had worked in a hospital, in an operating room, where he had learned all of the techniques of cleaning up blood.
Until police took a much closer look.
We literally took the car apart.
We removed the seats.
We removed the carpeting.
We did vacuumings for trace evidence.
We literally took the car apart.
We took the door panel apart, and behind the door panel we found some blood.
Tests later showed that the blood found on the passenger's door was Aimee Willard's.
But the most shocking discovery was something police noticed underneath the vehicle as it was being towed.
Look at this.
That's it.
As the sun was shining down underneath the car, it was illuminating the oil pan.
And looking at the oil pan, we were both in agreement right then and there that that was the same mark that was left on Aimee Willard's body.
The pattern of X's and O's on the oil pan was eerily similar to the marks on Aimee's body.
An expert at the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology confirmed that the pattern on the oil pan was consistent with the marks on Aimee's body.
All rapists, and to a certain degree serial killers, pick their victims based on a fantasy.
They have a fantasy in their head of what they-- all violent crime starts with a fantasy.
Prosecutors believe that Aimee Willard first caught Arthur Bomar's attention in Smokey Joe's Bar.
Willard first caught Arthur Bomar's attention in Smokey Joe's Bar.
From there, they believe Bomar followed Aimee out of the bar and along Route 476 as she drove home.
When Aimee was about to exit the highway, prosecutors believe Bomar bumped her car, causing her to pull over.
The contact left marks on the bumpers of both cars.
As she left her vehicle, Bomar struck her with the tire iron, causing the blood spatter on the guardrail, then dragged her to his car.
Where he took Aimee from there, no one knows, but the forensic evidence clearly shows that Bomar's Firestone tire left the tire impression at the crime scene, and that Bomar ran over Aimee with his vehicle, burning her skin, leaving the imprint of the car's oil pan on her torso.
He then left her body in the deserted lot and returned to the scene of the crime to dispose of Aimee's clothing.
Ironically, Bomar himself provided the most damning piece of evidence, the semen from Aimee's rape test kit matched Arthur Bomar's DNA profile.
Before Bomar's murder trial, police found the skeletal remains of Maria Cabuenos in nearby Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
County, Pennsylvania.
When Bomar was arrested, he was driving Cabuenos's automobile.
Maria's body was found less than 20 miles from Arthur Bomar's residence and 30 miles from where Aimee was abducted.
Like Aimee, Maria died from head injuries caused by a blunt instrument.
I know that he's still clearly suspected of the disappearance and murder of Maria Cabuenos.
It's been publicly reported.
And authorities look at other things, but I can't-- you know, there's no-- I really shouldn't say any more than that.
During the trial, the defense argued that Bomar was neglected as a child and had a low IQ.
Bomar had to be restrained several times during the trial because of violent outbursts.
Outside the courthouse, Bomar's family took their frustrations out on the media.
Don't get so close.
Well, we'll just talk. We'll stay away from you.
We'll stay away from you. -Hey, hey.
What's up? What's up?
His step-brother and his mother lashed out at news crews covering the trial.
Ms. Ganges, Ms. Ganges.
Ma'am, ma'am, ma'am.
Don't hit him.
Arthur Bomar was convicted of rape and first-degree murder and was sentenced to death.
Bomar's reaction?
When he was convicted and sentenced to death, he turned around and threatened me, with both fingers in the air, telling me to [bleep] you, Mrs. Willard, and your two kids.
Mrs. Willard, and your two kids.
He was just a stone-cold killer and a real predator.
I have in my career never really faced anybody that I felt was as dangerous, as remorseless, and as cold as Arthur Bomar.
He doesn't deserve for anyone to ever think about him again.
He is just a vile, evil man.
I think in the end, without the DNA, without the tire impression, and without the oil pan impression, I think we would have been very hard pressed to have the success that we did.
I think we would have been very hard pressed to have the success that we did.
In 1999, a minister's wife was found dead in an overflowing bathtub in her home in South Dakota.
Her cryptic suicide note left questions about her state of mind and her sense of time.
Forensic science provided those answers.
This peaceful house of God is the United Presbyterian Church.
Each Sunday morning, it opens its doors to the faithful of Wolsey, South Dakota.
The town is no more than a handful of dirt roads just off Highway 14 and several farms out on the blustery prairie.
The pastor of this congregation was Reverend Bill Guthrie.
He and his wife, Sharon, lived in the parsonage next door to the church.
He was a very strong minister, probably the most intelligent man when it came to the Bible.
Sharon Guthrie also helped her husband with church duties.
She did children's message.
It was before the sermon.
Tell them a story and send them with a package of Smarties to go back and sit down-- little candy Smarties.
The Guthrie's were looking forward to the wedding of their second daughter, Jennalu, but Sharon Guthrie would never see that day.
Just after dawn on May 14, 1999, Reverend Guthrie called an ambulance.
He had discovered his wife unconscious in the bathtub.
My wife's in the tub.
She's had an accident.
When emergency personnel arrived, they performed CPR and restarted her heart.
In the ambulance, she was placed on a respirator, but she never regained consciousness.
Despite the best medical care in the area, emergency room doctors could find no signs of brain activity.
We all decided at that point that it just was time to let her go.
The next day, Sharon Guthrie was pronounced dead.
When the Sheriff asked Reverend Guthrie about the incident, he said his wife was fine when he left home to go to the church to say his daily prayers.
When he was leaving the house to go to the church, his wife was drawing her bath water and was getting ready to take a bath.
He said he went to the church, was there maybe 10 minutes, came back to the house.
Guthrie said he found his wife face down in the overflowing bathtub.
Guthrie said he tried to pull her body out of the tub, but was unsuccessful.
All he could do was empty the tub and turn her body over before calling the ambulance.
We just figured we were dealing with some sort of an accident, you know, where this lady had had a seizure or heart attack or something while she was taking a bath.
Doctor Brad Randall performed the autopsy and found no signs of trauma or illness.
Fortunately, the emergency room personnel had taken blood samples when she was first brought to the hospital, which the pathologist could analyze.
So we had samples from a living individual rather than a dead individual, which toxicology in dead people is a little more difficult than working with an actual living individual.
So we were lucky to have those samples to work with.
The samples revealed three medications in Sharon's system.
Two were medications she had been prescribed and were in relatively low concentrations.
But there was one drug in her system she had not been prescribed.
The most important drug was a drug called temazepam, which is a benzodiazapine that was present in very high concentrations.
It is a drug not commonly associated with lethal overdoses.
Temazepam is a sedative.
The level in Sharon Guthrie's system would definitely render someone unconscious, although Randall could not be certain how many capsules were taken.
Probably greater than five to 10, somewhere in that category or more.
Dr. Randall listed the cause of death as drowning, with the temazepam overdose a contributing factor.
The manner of death was undetermined.
Was it suicide, or could it have been murder?
Three weeks after Sharon Guthrie's death, her daughter Jennalu decided to go ahead with her wedding as planned.
I talked to my dad about it.
I talked to family about it, asked to what they thought we should do and I talked to my husband about it and we decided that my mom would have wanted us to do it.
My dad actually performed the ceremony.
Meanwhile, Detective Jerry Lindberg was assigned to investigate Sharon Guthrie's death.
Lindberg was assigned to investigate Sharon Guthrie's death.
Sharon Guthrie's death.
Unfortunately, the scene of the drowning had not been preserved for evaluation.
The result of her being alive and taken to a hospital out of time, the place was left open.
A lot of the evidence was destroyed because people came in, the good neighbor thing, cleaned up, brought lunches, and so on.
But investigators discovered the source of the temazepam in Sharon's system.
It had been prescribed for her husband, Bill.
Bill Guthrie suspected his wife had accidentally ingested the pills while sleepwalking.
But none of her three daughters recall Sharon ever sleepwalking and investigators found something suspicious.
A few weeks before Sharon's death, Bill Guthrie filled his original prescription for temazepam at one pharmacy and then went to a second pharmacy, told them he had lost his first prescription, and got a second one.
Bill Guthrie filled his original prescription for temazepam at one pharmacy and then went to a second pharmacy, told them he had lost his first prescription, and got a second one.
Another inconsistency was Bill's clothing on the morning of Sharon's death.
Bill told the sheriff he had tried to lift his wife out of the bathtub when you first found her, yet witnesses said that his clothing was completely dry when the ambulance crew arrived.
He was dry.
If you spent any time at all wrestling around with a wet individual, you're going to get wet.
And investigators learned the pastor had some secrets.
A girlfriend in Nebraska-- in fact, that'd been town gossip just before they'd left the community and came to Wolsey.
Probably part of the reason they came up here is because of that.
I knew her from when they were at their previous church.
I knew my mom didn't like her, but I never really knew why.
Guthrie's mistress was a leading member of his former church in Nebraska.
The affair continued, even after Guthrie moved to South Dakota.
When Guthrie took the job in Wolsey, he told the church council that he needed to return to Nebraska for medical counseling because he was impotent.
I think on some occasions, they even paid his mileage.
And he never went to counseling.
He was going back to continue this affair.
But eventually, Guthrie's mistress grew dissatisfied with their clandestine affair.
Basically, and these are her words, all they would do is have sex and he would stay in the motel room.
They couldn't go out to eat, couldn't go to a movie, and she was tired of that.
And she wanted something more, so she put some pressure on him and he never did anything.
And then finally, in January, she broke up with him.
And there was no evidence that Bill Guthrie was impotent.
Not from what his girlfriend told us.
Apparently, he was able to perform adequately and did on frequent occasions.
Investigators now considered Bill Guthrie a suspect in his wife's death.
But adultery and prescription fraud is one thing, but murder is another.
Police enlisted Bill's oldest daughter, Suzanne, to find out if her father played a role in her mother's death.
She agreed to confront her father with a hidden microphone.
I thought maybe I can plead, as a daughter, for him to just be honest with me.
And he still totally denied everything from his affair to getting the medication.
In late July, investigators confiscated the church computer in order to see the email correspondence between the pastor and his lover in Nebraska.
The emails revealed nothing, but police wondered if there was information hidden somewhere on the computer's hard drive.
To find out, they turned to an expert in the new field of computer forensics.
After Sharon Guthrie's suspicious drowning, police confiscated the Guthrie's computer to see if it contained possible evidence.
Judd Robin's is an expert in the field of computer forensics.
He says that most of us know very little about how computers really work.
The most common misconception is that you can delete data by asking your program or your operating system to delete it and then it's gone.
It isn't.
That's because hitting the Delete key simply marks that material and the memory it uses as available for use in the future.
There is a residual traces of their existence in that space and so the equivalent in a computer system is that there is often a residual indication that you were there.
It's now trace.
Evidentiary value is tremendous if it's found before the space gets re-rented or released or, in the computer, reused by a new file.
The computer information trail may also show when files are created, downloaded, or edited.
Robbins used special software to search the memory for anything related to temazepam.
He discovered there had been numerous internet searches about sleeping pills just a month before Sharon died.
Someone had also downloaded numerous articles about temazepam, which had been found in Sharon's system.
Temazepam is the only sleeping pill that comes in a capsule form that you can take apart and it has powder inside, so it's easy to take apart and put it into something.
And Robbins found other information on the hard drive that he thought might be of value.
I didn't know exactly how and when she died, so I called Mike Moore and asked.
And I said, why?
And he goes, well, there seems to be a lot of information in her on bathtub accidents and I then told him that she drowned in a bathtub.
The searches were done the month before Sharon died, with the last one completed on April 27th.
The searches were done in April and she died in May.
On April 29th, Guthrie asked his doctor for a prescription for temazepam and filled it at the two different pharmacies.
The prescription was filled again on May 12th and 13th.
On May 14th, a heavily drugged Sharon Guthrie drowned in her tub.
Based on the computer evidence, Bill Guthrie was arrested and charged with murder.
The prosecution theorized that Guthrie wanted out of this marriage, but feared a divorce would jeopardize his position as a pastor.
So he looked for ways to make her death look like an accident.
And the way he may have done it was to lace her favorite drink, chocolate milk, with an overdose of sedatives.
She drank it every day.
That was just her thing.
She just always drank chocolate milk.
She loved chocolate milk.
Prosecutors believe that on the morning of her death, Bill Guthrie put the temazepam in his wife's chocolate milk then gave it to her in bed before going to the church.
After the drug's went into effect, he placed his wife, now unconscious, into the tub, filled it with water, and let her drown.
I felt we had a pretty good circumstantial case, but all our evidence was circumstantial.
But Jenalu Simpson still wasn't convinced that her father was a murderer.
She says her mother took an overdose of Benadryl, an allergy medication, a few weeks earlier, and required medical attention.
I thought it was accidental.
I thought that she had done it before with the Benadryl.
She had done it before somewhere with some herbal stuff.
I thought she probably did it again just to get some attention.
People who filled church pews to hear Bill Guthrie preach now filled the wooden benches of the Beadle County Courthouse.
It was packed everyday.
People would get here sometimes at 7:00 in the morning so they'd get a seat.
Prosecutor Mike Moore was confident of his case.
Then, Moore got the shock of his life.
The defense introduced a suicide note from Sharon Guthrie.
At his murder trial, Bill Guthrie revealed that several weeks after her death, he found a suicide note from his wife Sharon.
For some unexplained reason, it was hidden in a liturgy book in the church office.
Well, a bunch of things race through your head.
You're upset.
You're shocked.
The note was typed on a computer, but was unsigned.
It was dated May 13, 1999-- the day before Sharon died-- and addressed to her daughter.
Dear Suzanne, I am sorry I ruined your wedding.
I ruined your wedding.
Your dad told me about your concerns of my interfering in Jennalu's and the possibility I might ruin hers.
I won't be there, so put your mind at ease.
You will understand after the wedding is done.
I love you all.
The note referred to a minor incident that occurred at Suzanne's wedding a few years earlier.
Prosecutor Mike Moore asked his computer forensic expert, Judd Robbins, to reexamine the hard drive of the church's computer to see if he could find any trace of the suicide note, but he found none.
Robbins, to reexamine the hard drive of the church's computer to see if he could find any trace of the suicide note, but he found none.
Fingerprint expert Cindy Orton analyzed the note, spraying it with the chemical, ninhydrin.
If an individual writes a suicide note and they are truly contemplating suicide, they have a tendency to perspire.
Using ninhydrin is a good reagent because it does look for amino acids, which comes from sweat.
Steam from a household iron accelerated the process, revealing numerous fingerprints.
Somebody was perspiring quite heavily while they were handling that document.
For what reason, I don't know.
Bill Guthrie said he had given the note directly to his lawyer, but the prints on the note did not match either Guthrie or his attorney.
It was impossible to tell whether the prints were Sharon's, since she had never been fingerprinted, even at her autopsy.
Sharon's, since she had never been fingerprinted, even at her autopsy.
But if the note was typed on a computer and it didn't come from the computer in the church, where did it come from?
Police discovered that Guthrie owned a second computer, which he had given to his daughter and son-in-law shortly before his trial.
They now turned it over to the state's attorney.
The only thing we really wanted was the truth, to know exactly what happened.
Whether it be proving his innocence or proving his guilt, that was up to them.
Judd Robbins examined the hard drive from this second computer.
On it, Robbins discovered a document file entitled, Sharon.
The main text was missing, but it had the same closing line as the suicide note and had the same date, May 13.
Both documents had the same typographical error, no space between the comma and the year.
So we had margins the same.
We had fonts the same.
We had words the same.
The file had been created in August, three months after Sharon died.
Robbins also found evidence that the note was written by Bill Guthrie.
This suicide note was constructed in an inter-spliced, intertwined fashion, with several of his sermons in the month of August so that I could construct a timeline of working on sermon, working on suicide note, working on sermon.
I think at that point, it made me realize that he had done something, that he had done this and that he was guilty for this.
I thought the jury would see what I was seeing, that this was this guy's last ditch effort to get away with killing his wife and we caught him at it.
The jury convicted William Guthrie of first degree murder.
Guthrie of first degree murder.
He was sentenced to life in prison.
After the trial, Sharon Guthrie's body was exhumed so that she could be reburied in her native Nebraska.
Sharon's fingerprints were finally obtained.
Cynthia Orton compared Sharon's prints to those on the suicide note.
They did not match.
Well the question that leaves me with is whose fingerprints are on that document?
For now, that question remains a mystery.
Daughter Suzanne believes her father is guilty, but despite the computer forensic evidence, her sister Jennalu believes her father is innocent and stays in contact with him through phone calls and letters.
I've lost my mother, my father, and my sister throughout all of this and I lost them all within a year.
The sisters no longer speak.
The prosecutor says forensic science solved this case.
Without it, he says, Bill Guthrie would be a free man.
Without those sciences, you don't have a case.
If you don't have the pathologists finding drugs, if you don't have the computer expert finding that stuff on the computer, you don't have a case.
In the midst of a promising dance career, Tracy Jo Shine suddenly dropped out of school and shortly afterward disappeared.
Tracy Jo Shine suddenly dropped out of school and shortly afterward disappeared.
12 years later, debris from an old refrigerator would warm up what had become a very cold case.
Tracy Jo Shine grew up in Houston, Texas.
She was a good student, a Girl Scout, and played sports.
But her real interest, her passion was dance.
At the age of 13, she auditioned and was accepted at the prestigious High School for Performing Arts in Houston.
It was a dream come true.
And while away at school, Tracy Jo began to experiment with drugs.
That's when she started having the problems.
She started meeting the wrong people and started getting involved in taking drugs.
And I, at that time, just really didn't understand it, or didn't know what to do.
She started skipping classes.
Her grades began to slip.
And she became romantically involved with 31-year-old Michael Neal, who had recently been released from prison.
The first time I had met him and she had brought him over to my apartment, he seemed to be polite enough and seemed to be nice enough.
Eventually, Tracy Jo abandoned her dreams of a career in dance, dropped out of school, and, at the age of 18, moved in with her boyfriend, Michael, and his mother.
Michael, and his mother.
Tracy Jo's mother didn't know what to do next.
Tracy was not the Tracy she was before she did the drugs.
Tracy had become someone else that was controlled by drugs.
And I just kept praying that, you know, she'd just live through this and get out of all of it.
And then we could have our lives together again and go on.
Michael Neal had recently been implicated in a racially-motivated drive-by shooting.
Detective Marcel Dionne went to Neal's home to question him.
Neal wasn't home, but Tracy Jo was.
How long have you known him?
Tracy had just taken a shot.
The syringe was still there on the couch right there with her.
At first, you couldn't make heads or tails out of anything she was saying.
So he arrested Tracy Jo for using drugs.
She'd been arrested two other times, I believe, for the-- for a drug problem.
I believe, for the-- for a drug problem.
She said she had tried to stop.
I had attempted to see if there was some way that I could get Tracy committed to a drug program.
And I was finding that there was waiting lists at different places.
And there really wasn't a whole lot I could do, since she wasn't a child anymore.
At police headquarters, Tracy Jo offered to make a deal.
Tracy Jo offered to make a deal.
She said her boyfriend, Michael, was the one who committed the drive-by shooting.
And she agreed to testify against him in return for a lighter sentence for her drug charge.
Detective Dionne agreed to the deal.
Early the next morning, Michael Neal walked into police headquarters and put up the bail for Tracy Jo.
She was never seen again.
Nobody had seen or heard from her.
So at that point, you start calling her friends and start calling anybody that she'd been associated with.
Well, nobody had seen her.
And nobody had heard from her.
Marcel Dionne discovered that Michael Neal was a member of the Aryan Brotherhood, a violent white supremacist group.
This explained Neal's alleged involvement in the drive-by shooting which occurred in a black neighborhood.
When Dionne asked Michael Neal about Tracy Jo's whereabouts, he said that Tracy Jo left home shortly after her arrest and that he hadn't seen her since.
Dionne wasn't so sure.
The day after Tracy Jo Shine was released from prison on drug charges, she visited her mother to borrow some money.
Although Tracy Jo had always stayed in touch with her mother and brother, that visit was the last time her family saw her.
Tracy Jo had simply dropped out of sight.
Something was the matter.
I, for some reason, just felt something was wrong.
Virginia contacted Tracy Jo's boyfriend, Michael Neal.
Jo's boyfriend, Michael Neal.
I called over there to find out about Tracy, because I hadn't heard from her in a couple of weeks and to see what was happening.
And they told me she wasn't there anymore.
When Michael Neal wasn't forthcoming, Virginia had no other choice but to file a missing person's report.
Virginia had no other choice but to file a missing person's report.
Detective Marcel Dionne immediately suspected foul play.
Then a few weeks later, Dionne received an anonymous telephone call.
Yes, I'd like to report a murder that I-- She was telling me about this girl that was apparently killed by her boyfriend, stuffed in a refrigerator, and taken out to a car lot.
She was telling me about this girl that was apparently killed by her boyfriend, stuffed in a refrigerator, and taken out to a car lot.
The informant eventually revealed the identity of the dead girl.
It was Tracy Jo Shine.
The informant also said that the refrigerator used to store Tracy Jo's body was still at the used car lot owned by Michael Neal and his brother, Robert.
Neal and his brother, Robert.
Armed with a search warrant, detectives went to the car lot, found the refrigerator, but discovered it had recently been cleaned with bleach.
We took the refrigerator apart.
We collected a piece of human tissue from the freezer unit.
And it had some hair follicles on it.
Forensic scientists attempted an RFLP DNA enzyme analysis on that tissue, but were unsuccessful.
The hair was compared visually to hair taken from Tracy Jo's hairbrush.
But that comparison was inconclusive.
With no other leads, Detective Dionne spent the next few months looking all over Houston anywhere he suspected a body might have been buried.
I took a lot of heat.
Everybody thought I was crazy because I was digging up half of Harris County.
I was draining ponds.
We used horses.
We used four-wheelers.
I was digging someone.
But none of the leads were fruitful.
I knew that she had to be out there somewhere.
I just wouldn't give up.
Dionne also questioned Michael Neal's mother, Barbara, at her consignment shop.
There, Dionne noticed something suspicious.
In the display case was some women's jewelry which was identical to jewelry owned by Tracy Jo Shine.
I just couldn't believe the way they had taken Tracy Jo's jewelry and placed it in a glass case at the business they were running and selling it over the counter.
Barbara McAllister told police that after Tracy Jo moved out of her home, she simply took the jewelry Tracy Jo left behind and was trying to sell it.
Although it may have been in poor taste, it still didn't prove foul play.
But with nowhere else to turn, the investigation faltered.
Dionne had no choice but to attend to other cases.
I ordered all the evidence, plus the refrigerator, stored in our property room.
And basically, just about every year, almost to the day, they would call me-- I want to get rid of the refrigerator.
And I kept telling them, no, this is an open case.
I'm still working it.
Michael Neal was later arrested for another shooting incident and was convicted.
He was sentenced to life in prison.
His brother, Robert Neal, was arrested on a methamphetamine charge.
He, too, was convicted and sent to prison.
Despite their convictions, the Neal brothers continued to insist they knew nothing about Tracy Jo's disappearance.
It would take another 10 years before a cold case unit took a fresh look at the disappearance of Tracy Jo Shine.
Nothing was heard from Tracy Jo Shine for over a decade.
And police could find no solid evidence of what might have happened to her.
During those years, there had been no credit card activity, no applications for driver's licenses, no history of employment, nothing.
Tracy Jo's ex-boyfriend, Michael Neal, and his brother, Robert, were serving time in prison for crimes unrelated to her disappearance.
Then, in 1999, the Harris County Sheriff's Department formed a new cold case unit headed by Detective Roger Wedgeworth and Harry Fikaris.
Wedgeworth and Harry Fikaris.
The Tracy Jo Shine case was one of the first to cross their desk.
Tracy's like a lot of young girls.
If you look at her upbringing, she was a Girl Scout, very much loved by her mother, just a normal kid who goes up, goes to high school, goes to proms and everything.
And she got mixed up in drugs.
And of course, one of the worst mistakes of her life was meeting our suspect in this case, Michael Neal.
As a first step, they decided to retest the tissue sample found in Michael Neal's refrigerator with the new, more sophisticated PCR DNA test.
But after more than 12 years, the sample was too badly degraded.
Then there was another setback.
The hair found with the tissue sample could not be located.
But Fikaris and Wedgeworth were astonished to learn that the refrigerator was still in the Sheriff's Department property room.
Department property room.
In a long shot, investigators decided to take a look at the refrigerator one more time.
We opened it up.
And it looked fairly clean.
But we knew that it had been laid down on its back.
And we thought if there was any kind of body fluids or any kind of evidence, it may have drained into the wiring harness on the backside of it.
Forensic scientists swabbed every square inch of the refrigerator, and this time included the wiring and harness areas for any biological material that might be present.
There are so many nooks and crannies in a refrigerator, or any other machine like that, that if body fluid, things like that, is going to seep through, it would be impossible, probably, to clean it all.
The swabs were sent to the forensic lab.
I was skeptical that we would find anything of any value in the refrigerator simply because of the amount of time that it had been stored and the fact that, like so many other evidence storage areas, the environment was not ideal for preserving the evidence.
When Watson looked closer at the swabs, he discovered what appeared to be a piece of human skin.
Watson tested that skin sample using a PCR DNA test.
PCR testing essentially takes minute traces of DNA, then amplifies or makes enough copies of it so that it can be analyzed.
The analysis was long and arduous and, unfortunately, was unsuccessful.
After months of frustration, Watson heard about a new test the FBI laboratory had been experimenting with, a test using mitochondrial DNA.
Traditional DNA testing uses DNA from the cell's nucleus.
Mitochondrial DNA is taken from the mitochondria, which exists outside the cell's nucleus.
It's not as precise as traditional DNA testing, but in some cases, it's all scientists can get.
And this time, Watson was successful.
The next step was to find a known sample of Tracy Jo Shine's DNA for comparison.
Jo Shine's DNA for comparison.
Bill Watson took letters written by Tracy Jo over a decade earlier to see if her DNA could be identified in the saliva from the envelope flaps.
But the DNA from the saliva was too badly degraded.
Mitochondrial DNA is passed from generation to generation maternally, meaning that Tracy Jo's mitochondrial DNA profile would be identical to her mother's.
DNA profile would be identical to her mother's.
Even though we didn't have a sample from Tracy Jo to compare to the tissue that was inside the refrigerator, we did have her mother.
And we were able to get a mitochondrial profile from her mother.
When the mitochondrial DNA from the refrigerator was compared to Virginia Shine, it matched.
The biological material most likely was that of Tracy Jo Shine.
Had Tracy Jo's DNA been discovered on the handle of the refrigerator, that might not have been unusual.
But skin found on the wiring on the back harness was a completely different matter.
It's a wonderful, wonderful feeling.
It's a-- you know, you finally felt like all that hard work is finally coming together.
But even whenever we got that, we knew that this guy would never do the right thing and step up to the plate and tell the truth.
With this discovery, Michael Neal was charged with murder.
His brother, Robert, hoping to gain an early release from prison for his drug conviction, offered to make a deal.
After all these years that he'd spent in prison, I guess he finally realized he would never be getting out of prison, unless he did something.
I guess he finally realized he would never be getting out of prison, unless he did something.
We know you have something to tell us, Robert.
And we sat down, worked out a deal.
And he gave us his honest testimony, which we felt, mostly, was honest testimony, and told us what he knew about the case.
Robert not only revealed his brother's involvement in the murder, he also implicated his mother, his sister, and himself.
Robert Neal told police that his brother, Michael, feared Tracy Jo Shine would testify against him for the drive-by shooting in exchange for a lighter sentence for her drug arrest.
Tracy Jo Shine would testify against him for the drive-by shooting in exchange for a lighter sentence for her drug arrest.
So when Michael went to bail Tracy Jo out of jail, he did so to eliminate a potential witness.
The most important thing that Robert told us was he actually showed us how Michael Neal killed her.
And Robert made this motion like this, like a choking motion.
So we knew that she'd been strangled.
Robert said Michael killed Tracy Jo in his bedroom and left her body there for three days.
The smell of decomposition prompted Michael's mother to look into the couple's bedroom, where she saw the body.
Michael's mother to look into the couple's bedroom, where she saw the body.
She goes into the bedroom.
She sees that she's turning purple.
I mean, that's a clue right there that something is not right.
Neal's mother never reported Tracy Jo's death to police.
Tracy Jo's death to police.
After the body was removed, Robert said his mother and sister cleaned the bedroom and burned incense to remove the odor.
Robert admitted helping Michael transport the refrigerator with the body inside to the used car lot the brothers owned.
Robert told us that he never saw the body.
He said his brother just told him, help him move the refrigerator.
Basically, don't ask me any questions, and I won't tell you anything.
We'll just move this refrigerator out to the car lot.
He said, I can assume that Tracy Jo Shine was in there, but I never saw her in there, I never saw her in there.
Robert said he sat outside while Michael placed the body in a 55-gallon drum.
Where Michael later took the barrel is unknown.
But Michael Neal didn't realize that tissue invisible to the naked eye would lead to his downfall over a dozen years later.
Michael made a lot of mistakes at the very beginning by leaving the body in there for several days, by his mother finding out that Tracy was dead.
Instead of immediately disposing of the body, it allowed us to get evidence out of the refrigerator.
The fact is science always progresses, always moves forward.
And as it has, we've been able to develop the type of testing that could let us test those smaller and smaller samples and match it up.
So his biggest mistake was in thinking he'd get away with it.
Although prosecutors had no body, Michael Neal was convicted of Tracy Jo Shine's murder and was sentenced to an additional 45 years in prison.
Michael Neal was convicted of Tracy Jo Shine's murder and was sentenced to an additional 45 years in prison.
He won't be eligible for parole until 2017, when he'll be 60 years old.
Michael Neal can look you straight in the eye.
And there's no doubt in my mind that he could catch you, he could shoot you, he could do anything humanly possible to you-- it would not change his impression in any way.
His brother, Robert, is still serving time for his earlier conviction for manufacturing methamphetamine.
Michael's mother, Barbara, denied any knowledge of the murder, saying she thought Tracy Jo had died of a drug overdose.
Jo had died of a drug overdose.
Neither Barbara nor her daughter, Jeanie, were ever prosecuted for their alleged involvement in concealing evidence or abuse of a corpse, since the statute of limitations for those crimes had expired.
Virginia Shine says she will never stop looking for her daughter's grave, even though Michael Neal stubbornly refuses to say where it is.
The sad part of it is is if he's just trying to just keep on being the one in control, is that he won't let us know where she really is So that I could have some kind of peace Because it's-- I mean, it's not going to be any worse for him to tell me, to tell us the real truth.
Because it's-- I mean, it's not going to be any worse for him to tell me, to tell us the real truth.
And-- and so I can't ever forgive him for that.
Marcel Dionne's insistence on preserving the refrigerator for all those years provided the crucial forensic evidence necessary for a conviction.
I just couldn't believe it.
To me, it was just a huge weight off my back.
I've never been so happy over anything in my life.
The amount of effort that went into the sample processing on the front end was as much as you would put in any case, any very difficult case.
I mean, it was just-- on a scale of 1 to 10, I would say it was an 8 or a 9.
I would say it was an 8 or a 9.
Just after opening a vintage car restoration business, Phil Rouss became seriously ill.
Doctors had difficulty finding the cause.
But to forensic scientists, it looked like foul play.
From the day he found an abandoned Model A Ford in an old cotton warehouse, Phil Rouss knew that vintage automobiles would be his life.
For most of his career, Phil was a salesman.
In 1997, he quit to finally pursue his dream of starting an antique car restoration business.
He called it Top Quality, and it was housed in the garage near his home in Bartlett, Tennessee.
Phil was real excited about going into business.
That was his dream.
To no one's surprise, the shop was successful from the day it opened, and with that success came the need to expand.
For capital, Phil turned to his best friend and next door neighbor, Steve White, who was anxious to invest in the business in exchange for part ownership.
Phil's good friend, Kimo Coelho, also joined the company.
As a matter of fact, everybody was happy with the way things were going.
Everybody was happy we got off to a good start.
It was Phil's knowledge, talent, and experience that made the company so successful.
I've been working on them since I was 15 years old.
I guess I worked on my first antique car when-- I think I was 16.
When Phil Rouss became ill just two months after the shop opened, it was a serious blow.
I got to where I didn't have any energy and my stomach gave me a lot of trouble.
I had trouble with digestion, I had severe chest pains, my hands and feet began to get numb.
And to make matters worse, medical tests couldn't find the cause.
I had an ultrasound done, a CAT scan and an ultrasound.
And all those tests came up negative.
Inexplicably, Phil's condition continued to get worse.
He lost 30 pounds and had difficulty walking and his cognitive abilities were also affected.
He came home and he says, Jo, I think I've got Alzheimer's, I'm getting Alzheimer's.
I've got Alzheimer's, I'm getting Alzheimer's.
And I said, why, Phil?
And he said, I've forgot my way to the shop.
To protect his investment while Phil was ill, Steve White ran the day to day operations of the business.
Steve White ran the day to day operations of the business.
By December, Phil was convinced he was going to die.
I was so sick that night.
I was in such bad pain that I actually took my shirt off and laid on the kitchen floor on the linoleum.
I thought maybe that cold floor would take the pain and burning out of my stomach.
Restoring automobiles sometimes involves chemicals and solvents that can cause illness if the workplace isn't properly ventilated.
Phil wondered whether this had been his problem.
But his doctors were doubtful, since no one else in the shop became ill.
Then Phil became convinced that someone was trying to kill him.
So he went to police headquarters with an unusual request.
He said if he died, he wanted the police to perform an autopsy because he thought someone was poisoning him.
The police were skeptical.
I noticed that the other detectives were walking around and in fact, one of them was kind of doing this.
And I got upset.
I got very aggravated with that.
Phil's family thought he was exaggerating.
I wanted proof that something was being done to him.
And we said, you should have waited.
Nothing in the world could have convinced me that I was wrong that night or I'd have never gone to the police station.
If you didn't think it took some cojones to go down to the police station, you're wrong.
Phil was desperate.
He was afraid that nothing would be able to save his life.
Just months after opening his vintage car restoration business, Phil Rouss was so sick he could no longer run the business on a day to day basis.
His best friend, next door neighbor, and business partner, Steve White, was now running the business.
Steve White, was now running the business.
My business partner told me not to worry about it.
He said, if you're sick, you stay home.
Stay home and get well.
While sitting home, Phil Rouss heard rumors that his company wasn't paying its bills.
We were taking money in, but money was never distributed to back to our suppliers to pay their bills.
Rouss went to the bank and discovered that 10 company checks written by his partner had bounced because of insufficient funds.
And he also learned why the company had no money.
And when I got copies of the checks, I can be honest with you.
I can be honest with you.
I was not happy with what I saw.
He was paying for his personal cell phone bill-- $70, $80 a month-- he was paying for his own military insurance, he was making checks to this local wine and spirits company somewhere close, a store buying booze.
And Phil noticed that Steve White had written a check to a company called American National for $127.
American National for $127.
When he didn't recognize the company, Rouss decided to call.
She said, it's life insurance.
I says, can you tell me more about it?
She said, well it's for $100,000 and the beneficiary and owner of the policy is Steve Alan White.
But the life insurance policy wasn't on Steve White's life, it was on Phil Rouss'.
And there was no reciprocal policy on Steve White's life naming Rouss as the beneficiary.
Leona White says her husband did nothing wrong, that they were only trying to protect their investment in the event of Phil's death.
Steve wasn't into auto restoring.
His involvement in the business had been more from a business management standpoint.
We kept trying to have business meetings so we could see the checkbook, which we have never seen.
And every time we'd go to have a meeting, Steve would get up and get angry and storm out of the house.
Steve would get up and get angry and storm out of the house.
So we were getting a little bit suspicious.
The final straw came when Steve White closed the company's bank accounts without telling Bill, who found out through the bank teller.
She said, well, Mr. White came in two days ago, walked out of the bank with $2,943, and closed the account.
And she said, the reason I mention it to you, Mr. Rouss, is because there were checks outstanding and he said he didn't care, he just wanted the money.
Rouss believed that as 50% owner of the business, he had the power to halt all such transactions, but he was wrong.
When Phil's lawyer reviewed the partnership agreement, he discovered that Phil only owned 2% of the business, Steve White owned the remaining 98%.
Steve White owned the remaining 98%.
Well, I signed a lot of things in 1997.
If Steve came over and said, you need to sign this because this is whatever, we'd sign it.
He was completely duped and into signing this contract.
Phil now began to suspect his partner and decided to visit Dr. Kevin Merigian, one of the top forensic toxicologists in the United States.
He was one of the worst cases that I had seen.
So I mean he was very, very sick.
And I said, well, I think I'm being murdered, I don't know how.
I don't know how.
I don't know how, I don't know what's being used on me.
Dr. Merigian analyzed Phil's urine test which had been done earlier and he also performed a physical examination.
But before the results were in, Phil had more bad news.
All of the business assets he'd brought with him to the company, which included the building and real estate, had been transferred to his partner, Steve White, and put up for sale.
Phil Rouss was not only dying, he was now penniless.
Phil Rouss began to suspect that the improprieties in his business and his suspicions of being poisoned might somehow be related.
Mr. Rouss wasn't very functional, if you would say, cognitively.
He had an inability to concentrate, focus, he was very anxious.
To find the cause of the illness, Phil's urine was sent for a heavy metals test.
The test revealed Phil had arsenic in his system.
A level of 63 is in the high range, but far from lethal.
Normally, there is no arsenic in one's system unless the person has consumed large amounts of seafood, which Phil had not.
He said, Mr. Rouss, do you know of anybody that might want you dead?
I says, what are you telling me?
Dr. Merigian suspected Phil was being poisoned.
The poisoned cells do not continue to exhibit arsenic in them.
Arsenic does the damage and then it's excreted from the body or it's sequestered in the bone.
So by any measure, you're not going to be able to identify the actual compound itself, even though the damage is there.
Phil tried to recall anything suspicious about the time he spent with his partner, Steve White.
And then he remembered-- every time he and Steve had a meal or a drink together, Phil's health deteriorated.
Phil's health deteriorated.
I noticed that several times when we ate together, I would get sick afterwards, the next day or two.
I would get sick afterwards, the next day or two.
And I just kept getting sick.
Every time we'd eat together, I'd get sick.
Even more alarming, Steve White was a chemist by training and taught chemistry at the local high school.
As a final forensic test, Dr. Merigian gave Phil Rouss very specific instructions.
I told him, don't cut your hair.
And then I would be able to clip it and send it to a laboratory for analysis.
When someone is exposed to poison, it goes through the body and is usually excreted, but it also gets deposited in the hair root at the time of exposure.
When the hair grows out, the shaft becomes an historic record of when the exposure took place.
When Phil's hair grew longer, a strand was sent for an ICP test, which tests for 22 different metal components at the same time.
Hair grows at a pretty regulated rate.
And someone could take a shaft of hair, divide it into segments, and determine what was present a month ago, what was present two months ago depending on that placement on the original shaft.
The hair was cut into quarter inch pieces, marked, then each piece was placed in a separate vial, mixed with acidified water, and boiled for seven hours.
This cocktail was then put through the ICP.
The test results were startling.
When Phil was in the hospital, his hair showed no exposure to poison.
But prior to that, when Phil was living at home, Dr. Merigian found traces of another poison, mercury.
Dr. Merigian found traces of another poison, mercury.
I believed that he was ingesting it.
I didn't know who or why it would be delivered to him, but I had no doubt that he was poisoned with heavy metals.
State law requires that police be notified when any poison is found in someone's system.
When the Bartlett Police Department learned of the poisoning and the financial dispute between Phil and his partner, they took out a search warrant to search Steve White's home.
I thought that at that time, well, now we have something to look into and we were going to investigate it as a criminal matter.
In White's backyard, in a storage shed, they found a laboratory.
It kind of looked like a little mini science lab, like a chemistry lab.
A makeshift lab, you know?
There were several different jars of unusual looking powders, strange looking like burner and things like that that you would see in a science lab.
Leona White says the reason her husband had the lab was for their children as a way to interest them in science.
He would do things like mix baking powder and vinegar to make a volcano.
But investigators soon discovered items in the shed that were anything but child's play.
In a glass jar labeled baking powder, forensic scientists found traces of mercury and arsenic.
The arsenic was a special formulation which won't be identified here, except to say it was odorless and tasteless.
Detective Bailey confronted White with the lab results.
And he had told me that was crazy, absurd, and ridiculous.
He said, there's no way there's arsenic in that.
I'll tell you what, bring it to me and I'll drink every bit of it.
A few minutes later, he had said, if I was going to kill this guy, I sure wouldn't use arsenic, I'd do it with something much quicker and lethal.
I'd do it with something much quicker and lethal.
Everything in his statement that he gave to the police, a 21-page rambling statement, was false.
And I'm not even sure if Steve White is his real name.
A search of the car restoration office produced an envelope found hidden behind the electrical panel.
Analysis of the materials inside revealed arsenic, antimony, mercury, and lead, each a highly toxic metal.
A forensic document examiner compared the handwriting on the envelope to known samples of Steve White's and concluded they were both similar.
Steve white.
Was arrested and charged with the attempted murder of Phil Rouss.
But important questions remained-- how did the poisons get into Phil Rouss' body?
Forensic toxicology proved Phil Rouss had been poisoned by heavy metals, and similar poisons were found in the home of his business partner, Steve White.
But prosecutors didn't have enough evidence to show how Phil Rouss was poisoned.
We were never able to prove conclusively how he got these compounds into Mr. Rouss' system.
We were able to prove that he had ample opportunity.
Phil Rouss recalled a number of incidents with Steve White marked by unusual behavior.
Prior to his illness, Phil and Steve were having dinner at a local restaurant.
Not long after placing their order, White complained about the poor service.
White complained about the poor service.
He got up and went into the kitchen and came back with Phil's entree but not his own.
There was another incident involving a bottle of wine.
Mr. White made a bottle of wine, brought it to Mr. Rouss insisting that he drink all of it and insisting that he get the bottle back because he wanted to give Mr. Rouss some more.
And White would often visit Phil at home to share a cup of coffee and talk about work.
But Phil said Steve would frequently ask Phil to get something from another room, leaving Steve alone with the coffee.
Phil and Kemo Coelho both recalled a time when White offered to get them hamburgers for lunch.
After eating these, they became they both became very ill.
And they actually made a joke about how they were never going to send Steve White out for food again because it's going to make us sick again.
When confronted with the evidence, Steve White denied any involvement with Phil's illness.
Steve White denied any involvement with Phil's illness.
His lawyer claimed that the accusations were circumstantial and that there was no proof White was in any way involved.
The defense also pointed out that the lab results showed only trace amounts of the various heavy metals in Rouss' body, but never a lethal amount.
The prosecution claimed this was intentional, that Mr. White wanted Phil to die slowly, after a prolonged illness, so there would be no suspicions.
I hate to say ideal, but it actually is the ideal way of trying to harm someone because if you're not focused or you're not suspicious of it, the physician won't see it.
The fact that there were poisons found, the amount of these poisons that it would take to kill Mr. Rouss was irrelevant.
The mere fact that the defendant had arsenic, antimony, lead, mercury at his disposal was the relevant fact.
The prosecution says the motive was money, that Phil Rouss' death would have enabled White to get out of debt.
White to get out of debt.
White had over $90,000 in credit card debt, a substantial amount for a public school teacher.
The prosecution subpoenaed several waitresses from the Bartlett area, all attractive women with the same story.
They said Steve White was a very generous tipper.
In one instance, for a $15 check, White tipped the waitress $60.
White tipped the waitress $60.
A $100,000 life insurance policy could pay his way out of debt.
If Mr. Rouss had died, he would also have inherited 100% of a small business.
100% of a small business.
After a week-long trial, the jury found Steve White guilty of first degree attempted murder, theft, and sales tax violations.
He was sentenced to 31 years in prison.
If it hadn't been for the heavy metals test and Dr. Merigian running all tests on my husband, he would have been dead.
His antique automobile restoration business is now closed.
To this day, White maintains his innocence.
These people were our friends for 14 years.
I mean we thought they were our friends.
I couldn't believe that he had made that charge against Steve.
I know Steve didn't do it.
Phil still has numbness in his extremities and is unable to walk due to nerve damage.
This guy that I know, he was my business partner, he's going to jail.
I don't know for a long time.
I don't know, I may be crippled the rest of my life.
I said, two families are devastated.
Who won today?
You tell me.
Tell me who won here today.
To make me what I ought to be.
An unemployed gardener with a history of mental illness was a vital witness in the case of a missing six-year-old girl.
Between songs, he provided details about events which took place more than a decade earlier.
Investigators weren't sure the man could be trusted and left it up to forensic science to determine the truth.
Memorial Day weekend, 1986.
In Silver Spring, Maryland, it was so hot, six-year-old Michelle Dorr asked her father if she could play in the small pool in their backyard.
She was playing in the backyard pool for a while and showing how me how she could blow bubbles in the water and that sort of thing.
Michelle was spending the weekend with her father.
Her parents were going through a bitter divorce.
And custody arrangements for Michelle, their only child, were still being worked out.
Michelle's mother, Dee Dee, wanted full custody of her daughter.
I got an ex parte order saying that I was a threat to Michelle and a threat to her, and I was physically abusive, and she needed court-ordered custody right then.
But those problems were put aside for what Carl believed would be a pleasant weekend with his daughter.
After Carl made lunch, he went back outside to check on Michelle, but she wasn't there.
So he walked to his neighbor's home, the Clark family, to see if Michelle was there visiting her friend Elizabeth.
But they hadn't seen her.
And he said, no she's not here.
And I looked at Elizabeth and-- she's not with you?
I couldn't believe what Geoff was saying.
It just didn't register at first that she couldn't be with Elizabeth.
And at that point, I realized that she's never gone any further than the Clark house, that something's wrong.
Carl Dorr immediately contacted police.
She was not a little girl who roam off indiscriminately.
She was not a little girl who would roam off, and wander away, and take up with strangers.
I mean, the Clark house was 50 feet away, so I never, never had to worry about her crossing the street or going wandering off.
If I wanted to find her, I knew where to find her.
When police contacted Michelle's mother, Dee Dee, she told them she knew what had happened to Michelle.
She point blank told them that I did it-- I did something with Michelle.
Michelle's mother told the police, he had threatened to harm his own daughter.
He had threatened, in the heat of anger, in the heat of a very horrible divorce, to take the daughter, take Michelle away so that her mother couldn't have her anymore.
You have to take it in the context that she's a mother who is in this very nasty divorce separation custody battle and also somebody who her daughter has just disappeared.
So you have take it that context.
Carl Dorr was outraged by his ex-wife's accusation and demanded to be given a polygraph test.
He failed.
He's trying to tell me that I didn't pass a polygraph test.
That's an impossibility.
I didn't have anything to do with Michelle disappearing.
Don't tell me I failed a polygraph test.
That didn't happen.
Carl Dorr was now the prime suspect.
And soon, he would tell police of the role he'd played in his daughter's disappearance.
In the days after Michelle Dorr's disappearance, missing posters were placed throughout the area, but there was no sign of the little six-year-old girl.
Investigators were convinced her father, Carl, had either kidnapped or killed her.
Carl Dorr had failed a polygraph test.
And the detective on the case was pressuring him to confess.
He kept insisting, you know, you've done something.
I know you've done something with Michelle.
And we're going to find her body.
And when we find her body, I'm coming to get you, is what he told me point blank, finger in the face, in my face screaming and yelling, you need to confess.
Just a few days later, Carl Dorr confessed.
On three different occasions, he told the police he'd killed his daughter and told the police where they could go and find her body.
And one of them was underneath the, I guess, the crawl space of his house.
I guess, the crawl space of his house.
Another was in his father's own grave in a cemetery in DC.
Police checked the crawl space of the home and found nothing.
They also checked the local cemetery where his father was buried, but nothing was found.
He felt a lot of pressure.
And the police put a lot of pressure on him.
And as a result of that pressure and the guilt and shame that he felt about his daughter's disappearance, he cracked.
There's no doubt about that. He cracked.
I had no-- I couldn't deal with what they were telling me, that we're not going to find Michelle alive.
I just was trying to go into some sort of denial about that.
He then checked himself into a local hospital.
He thought the television was talking to him and that he had the power to find Michelle and bring her back to life.
Michelle and bring her back to life.
I was starting to lose it, I mean, in a psychiatric sense.
I mean, I was having a nervous breakdown.
I was hallucinating.
I was seeing things that weren't there.
I was hearing people that weren't there.
After three days of much needed rest and sedation, Carl was released from the hospital and told the press that he had never confessed.
Carl was released from the hospital and told the press that he had never confessed.
He said his statements were twisted into an admission of guilt.
To prove his point, he asked to take a second polygraph examination.
This time, he passed.
Investigators now began to wonder, was it possible that someone else had taken Michelle Dorr?
In my experience, in a case where somebody confesses or where the police have the wrong suspect, they seem to try to make all the facts fit around that person.
So they're so busy doing that, and they have the tunnel vision that we have the right suspect, this is who it is, that they forget about looking at any other options.
Months went by and then years with no sign of Michelle.
The investigation came to a dead end.
In the minds of police, Carl Dorr remained a suspect, but they had no evidence to charge him.
Then six years later, there was a new development.
10 days after 24-year-old Laura Houghteling disappeared from her Bethesda home, her family tells reporters they believe they know what happened to her.
In what seemed to be an unrelated case, a Harvard graduate, Laura Houghteling, was reported missing.
She lived a few miles away from Michelle and Carl Dorr.
Laura Houghteling had been stabbed to death in her bedroom while asleep.
Her killer left behind few clues.
He had done an unusually thorough job of cleaning up the crime scene.
Normally, we would have found blood splatter elsewhere in the room or some indications of a fight or something.
But that area, that bedroom, the crime scene itself had been cleaned up and cleaned up very good.
But he made one mistake.
In Laura Houghteling's hair brush was one foreign hair.
It wasn't human.
It was from a wig.
The Houghteling's gardener, 30-year-old Hadden Clark, was a known cross-dresser.
He had mental problems.
We also discovered that he was a cross-dresser.
He would dress in women's clothing.
The wig hair in Laura Houghteling's hairbrush matched a wig found in Hadden Clark's possession.
Investigators believe that after killing Laura Houghteling, Hadden Clark dressed in women's clothing, put on the wig, and left the scene of the crime in broad daylight without creating any suspicion.
Hadden Clark dressed in women's clothing, put on the wig, and left the scene of the crime in broad daylight without creating any suspicion.
Hadden Clark was convicted of Laura Houghteling's murder.
Then, police made a startling discovery.
The police say to themselves, hey, wait.
We've heard this name before.
This was a guy that we were looking at who lived in the house where Michelle Dorr was last supposed to have been seen or have gone.
And so at that point, they started really pressing Hadden on the Michelle Dorr case and looking at him as a very serious suspect.
Hadden on the Michelle Dorr case and looking at him as a very serious suspect.
Hadden Clark lived just two houses away from Michelle Dorr at the time of her disappearance.
His niece, Elizabeth, was Michelle's playmate.
When Michelle first disappeared, Hadden Clark was questioned about his whereabouts that day.
And something unusual happened during his interrogation that should have aroused police suspicions.
Hadden Clark confessed to the murder of 23-year-old Laura Houghteling, but he denied having anything to do with the disappearance of Michelle Dorr.
Houghteling, but he denied having anything to do with the disappearance of Michelle Dorr.
But on the day Michelle disappeared, police discovered that Clark was alone in his brother's home, just two doors away from Michelle's home.
He was packing his things, since his brother had kicked him out because of what he called, inappropriate behavior with the children.
What happened that day, back in 1986, was that Hadden was very angry.
His brother, his brother's wife, and his children had left the home in order to give Hadden an opportunity to get his things and get out.
And they had given him a deadline to get out.
That same day, police questioned Hadden Clark and asked him if he knew anything about Michelle's disappearance.
He was answering questions, and was cooperative.
When the nature of the interview changed and Michelle Dorr's name was mentioned, Hadden's entire demeanor changed.
He began to shake violently.
He began to rock back and forth in his chair.
He actually became physically sick and had to leave the room at the mere mention of Michelle's name.
Although police knew his behavior was unusual, it was discounted once Carl Dorr allegedly confessed.
There was no evidence to suggest that Hadden Clark had killed Michelle Dorr, other than his own quirky, bizarre behavior, which could be attributed to a number of things, one of which being his own mental illness.
Dorr, other than his own quirky, bizarre behavior, which could be attributed to a number of things, one of which being his own mental illness.
So that's why the police stepped away from Hadden Clark and focused on Carl Dorr for months and years after Michelle's disappearance.
How can you not suspect this guy in 1986 if you even spend an afternoon with him?
You don't have to go to Kmart to figure out he's crazy.
Once in prison for Laura Houghteling's murder, Clark refused to answer questions about Michelle Dorr.
Clark refused to answer questions about Michelle Dorr.
I know what's going on I'm not talking about nothing because my lawyer told me not to.
I told you honestly.
I wouldn't-- I answered some of your questions, whatever you want to ask.
But some questions I'm not going to answer.
And that's just the way it is.
This is Jim Beckette.
At one time, he was incarcerated with Hadden Clark in the same prison cell block.
Clark in the same prison cell block.
He had more luck getting Hadden to talk about his crimes than the police.
I just wanted to find out the truth of it, so I got in real close to him.
And I sort of felt it was a window of opportunity to find out the truth through him.
Rather than intimidating him, I became a good friend.
And I talked to him on many, many occasions.
One day, while Beckette and Clark were in the prison cafeteria, Beckette asked Hadden about Michelle Dorr.
He was saying she was such a lovely young girl and all.
And I could see it was bothering him.
I looked at him. And I said, Hadden.
I said, why did you do it?
And when I said it like that, he blurted out.
He says, I didn't mean to do it. You know, he didn't repeat it.
But he says, I didn't mean to do it.
And it was like he knew what was being said.
And he knew he had just confessed to me that he had killed her.
Beckette then told police that Clark confessed to killing Michelle Dorr in a small bedroom in his brother's home.
But police had no physical or forensic evidence to charge Clark.
But then, they remembered how expertly Clark cleaned the crime scene after Laura Houghteling's murder.
The police put two and two together and realized that he had been able to clean, meticulously clean, a crime scene where there was a lot of blood shed.
He was able to remove evidence from a crime scene, to the point where family members had no idea that a murder had taken place there.
It had been 10 years since Michelle's disappearance.
And Hadden Clark's brother had sold the home.
And a number of families had occupied it since.
Police wondered whether any forensic evidence remained.
Hadden Clark's prison roommate told police that Clark admitted killing Michelle Dorr in a bedroom in his brother's home.
But 10 years had passed.
And the home had been owned by a number of families since.
The bedroom was only 7 by 10 feet.
It had no rugs or carpet, but it did have the original oak wood floor.
Unfortunately, it had been sanded and refinished with polyurethane at least once, possibly more, which might have destroyed any evidence that existed.
To find out, police used luminol, a chemical which glows when it comes into contact with the iron component in blood.
After spraying the floor, investigators noticed a faint glow along the seams of the oak panelling.
What actually appeared was long luminescence lines along the slats of the floorboards, not on the surface of the floor, but deeply embedded in the actual slats themselves.
The entire floor was taken apart for further tests.
Investigators wanted to know if the blood between the floorboards was human, and if it was, whose blood was it?
Forensic scientist, Susan Ballou, used Q-tips to swab the side of each seam of every floorboard.
The Q-tips were rinsed with phenolphthalein, then with hydrogen peroxide.
Only two tiny areas turned purple, a positive presumptive test for blood.
Unfortunately, it wasn't a large enough sample for DNA testing.
So then we had to decide what else can be done with this particular blood, these samples that we definitely want to determine where they originated from?
So scientists decided to try a mitochondrial DNA test.
Mitochondria exists outside of the cell's nucleus.
And they're passed on genetically from a mother to her children.
It's not as precise as nuclear DNA testing, but it still can be used for identification.
There's a lot more mitos, as we call them, present in a cell than the one nucleus.
So the theory is because of those mass numbers in each individual cell, you have a better opportunity to get a higher level of the mito DNA that you might be able to get results with.
The mitochondrial DNA from blood between the floorboards matched the mitochondrial DNA profile of Michelle's mother.
In other words, somebody from their family left blood at that location.
Since Michelle had been inside the home and not her mother, the blood was believed to be Michelle's.
Prosecutors believe that after Carl Dorr went inside to make lunch, Michelle left the pool to look for her friend Elizabeth.
In a freak, tragic coincidence, when Michelle knocked on Elizabeth's door, no one was home except Hadden, who was packing his things, since his brother had ordered him to move out.
We believe that he saw Michelle.
He saw her as an opportunity to vent his rage.
We also believe that he saw it as an opportunity to get revenge on his brother.
Police believe Hadden killed Michelle in the upstairs bedroom then cleaned the blood from the floor.
He probably removed Michelle's body in one of the duffel bags neighbors saw him carrying when moving out later that day.
I don't believe he has an ounce of remorse for what he's done to Michelle.
And he doesn't deserve-- he doesn't even deserve to live as far as I'm concerned.
He's is one completely worthless as a human being.
I have nothing to say to him I don't need his apologies.
I don't need anything from him.
Fortunately, the sanding, polyurethane, and 10 years worth of detergents hadn't destroyed the mitochondrial DNA evidence.
Carl Dorr has since remarried and moved on with his life.
But he has kept Michelle's letters and this crayons self-portrait she drew just days before she was murdered.
She had just lost one of her front teeth before she disappeared.
So she had a little bit of a gap in her front teeth.
A really sweet, innocent little girl.
Hadden Clark was convicted of Michelle Dorr's murder and was sentenced to a second life term in prison.
Shortly after his conviction, Hadden Clark directed police to the shallow grave where he had buried Michelle's body.
It was just 12 miles from her home.
I believe when Hadden asked the police, or told the police that he would show them where Michelle Dorr's body was, he asked to be able to dress as a woman.
The police went and got him women's clothes and a wig.
Hadden Clark now claims his female persona, whom he refers to as Kristen Bluefin, is the real killer.
He dresses as this woman.
He writes letters as this woman.
He speaks as this woman.
And it is the woman that commits the crimes.
Psychologists say that Clark, here apparently unaware of being videotaped before his police interrogation, is a paranoid schizophrenic who cannot control his compulsion to kill.
He's still working on me.
Everyone who knows him is convinced he would kill again if given the chance.
He's intelligent.
I think he was able to get away with crimes for a long time.
And I think that he knows what he's doing.
He's good at his job.
He is a definite skilled criminal in making sure that the crime scene is cleaned up, all little loose ends are tied up.
However, there's always been some small bit of evidence that we have found to still pinpoint that crime to Hadden Clark.
What happens when a healthy middle aged woman suddenly collapses and dies?
And medical science can't find the cause of death.
Months later, a second forensic look discovered evidence that had been right under their noses the entire time.
Dana Point, California, just 60 miles south and a world away from Los Angeles, is a haven for those seeking a quiet, oceanside lifestyle.
In 1988, it was home to Janet and Richard Overton, and their 17-year-old son, Eric.
60-year-old Richard was a successful computer consultant and part-time professor.
46-year-old Janet was a member of the local school board.
She was such a genuinely nice person - smiling, and had good things to say.
The Overtons lived on a tranquil cul-de-sac.
After 19 years of marriage, they seemed to be a classic example of 'when opposites attract'.
While Janet was outgoing and high school educated, Richard held a PhD, and was much more reserved.
Richard held a PhD, and was much more reserved.
He was always the loner, and I understand that he graduated from high school after three years.
He was editor of one of his campus newspapers.
As I said, he was a very smart man.
Janet was passionate about her work on the school board, a job she took seriously.
At one point, she served as president.
But her number one priority was her son.
She took such pleasure in him, and I know that one of her goals was to hand him his diploma when he walked across the stage, graduating from Dana Hills High School.
On January 24th, Janet and her son Eric packed up the family van to spend the day on a yacht with some friends.
But before leaving the house, Janet collapsed.
Eric told his father, who immediately called for an ambulance.
By the time emergency personnel arrived, Janet was unconscious.
When they got to the hospital, she was dead.
An autopsy found no indication of how she died.
They did not find anything that they were comfortable calling a cause of death.
Or even close!
Surprisingly, Janet's medical records indicated she had made 60 visits to different doctors, clinics, and hospitals in the last year.
There was just an amazing amount of workup done on the deceased, Janet Overton, in the previous year, because she had been very sick, and had been to all sorts of special clinics, working things up.
They didn't find anything.
Janet had complained of a number of various ailments, from nausea, to skin irritations, to general pain.
She was walking very slowly, and had a cane to help her walk, and was really looking miserable.
It appeared to the medical examiner that Janet's death was as mysterious as her other medical problems over the past year.
Her death would have remained a mystery, had it not been for a telephone call, about an incident 14 years earlier.
Janet Overton's death at the young age of 46 was officially listed as 'pending investigation', which is another way of saying 'unknown'.
For the next six months, there was no further investigation into Janet's death.
That is, until the local sheriff's department recieved a telephone call from Dorothy Boyer, who was once married to Richard Overton.
Dorothy Boyer, who was once married to Richard Overton.
Dorothy had heard about Janet's death, and had a story to tell about Richard's past.
Dorothy said she divorced Richard when she found out he was a bigamist.
He was married to another woman at the same time he was married to her, and had children with both women.
He maintained two households, and he decieved two women.
He consistently had troubled relationships with women.
All of his adult life, which went to his first marriage, the bigamist marriage with Carolyn Hutchinson, and his third marriage with Janet.
There was a definite pattern there.
When the couple divorced, Dorothy gained custody of their children, and took possession of their house, which infuriated Richard.
Almost immediately, Dorothy began to suffer from skin lesions, nausea and pain - the same symptoms that plagued Janet Overton.
One day, after their divorce, Richard visited Dorothy to discuss some issues relating to their children.
Dorothy noticed an unusual odor coming from her milk.
She took the milk to police for testing.
Scientists discovered large amounts of selenium, a type of poison.
Dorothy accused Richard of placing the selenium in her milk during his visit.
When confronted with the evidence, Richard confessed.
In return, Dorothy refused to press charges against Richard.
He had to admit 'Yes, I did do this,' and he was sent into anger counseling.
When he came out of anger counseling, he made another attempt - which he denied.
And that was when Dorothy confronted him, and just told him, 'You make any more attempts on me, or anybody in my family, and I'm gonna have you taken away in handcuffs.' And from then on, he backed off, and he didn't do anything to Dorothy.
And from then on, he backed off, and he didn't do anything to Dorothy.
After hearing this news, Lieutenant Carney wanted to exhume Janet Overton's body for another autopsy.
But there was a problem.
Janet Overton had been cremated.
Toxicologist Paul Sedgwick's only option was to rexamine Janet's blood and tissue samples left over from the autopsy.
When he tested those samples for selenium, he could find none present.
Despite the setback, investigators pressed on.
And soon discovered that Janet had a secret life of her own.
She had been involved in a long-time affair with Bill Dawson, someone she worked with on the school board, and who owned the yacht she was going on the day she died.
Mr. Dawson was very forthright, very honest, he knew his career was on the line by revealing this.
Mr. Dawson was also adamant that he had nothing to do with Janet's death.
In Janet's home, police discovered 133 computer discs, and dozens of diaries written by Richard Overton - some were written in Russian, and Spanish.
As you read the diaries, and read the diskettes, it tells a whole different story of Richard Overton's relationship with Jan.
The relationship Richard pointed out to me, at my time of interview, they're having a 'loving relationship, and the bonds of love were strong' - was totally inconsistent with what he wrote in his diaries.
And Lieutenant Carney noticed an interesting deletion in the diaries.
He had cut the page out of the diary.
Many of the discs contained portions of documents that had been deleted.
The discs were sent to a computer forensic examination firm for analysis.
When material in a computer document is deleted, it's not actually deleted - instead, the material is identified on the disc as space available to be reused if needed.
If that space isn't needed, the deleted material is still there.
The recovered information from Richard's hard drive revealed that Richard knew of his wife's affair with Bill Dawson, and was angry about it.
Overall, his writings chronicled a deeply troubled relationship.
Approximately one week before her death, he made an entry that said 'the love-hate relationship between Janet and I has turned to pure hate.
I will deal with this soon.' Some passages of the handwritten diaries had been covered with correction fluid.
Some passages of the handwritten diaries had been covered with correction fluid.
Carney suspected incriminating information might be underneath.
To find some way to see underneath the deletions, the diaries were sent to the forensics lab.
A forensic document examiner had brought the diary for us to look at, and was curious if we could use some type of light source that was available to us in the indentification bureau to illuminate the information that was underneath the correction fluid.
Black used what a decade ago was a new and untested piece of equipment - The process worked.
The process worked.
Some of those hidden entries corroborated the severity of the problems in the Overton's marriage.
The Overton marriage was a marriage that slowly deteriorated over a period of time, and then quickly deteriorated, to the point where there was no contact between Richard and Janet Overton - they had separate bedrooms, they took meals separately.
She confided to a couple of her friends that as soon as Eric graduated from high school, she was outta there.
And he knew it, too.
The diaries were important because it showed motive.
We saw the relationship between Jan and Richard on a daily basis.
There was everything listed in these diaries, and when I say everything, I mean everything.
But if Richard was somehow involved in Janet's death, the diaries gave no hint of how he killed her.
Forensic scientists suffered a major setback when they could find no trace of the poison, selenium, in Janet Overton's tissue samples.
Years earlier, Richard Overton admitted putting selenium in his ex-wife's drink, because he was angry about the financial terms of their divorce.
Richard Overton admitted putting selenium in his ex-wife's drink, because he was angry about the financial terms of their divorce.
But his ex-wife never filed charges.
But this admission of an earlier poisoning prompted forensic scientists to take a second look at Janet Overton's tissue samples.
Almost immediately, the toxicologist made a startling discovery.
He detected the odor of bitter almonds.
Within seconds, the odor of cyanide didn't really overpower me, but it just jumped out - I was two or three feet away, and there was just no question this was cyanide.
And large amounts.
Only 1 person in 3 has the ability to detect cyanide in this way.
But he would need more proof than his nose.
Sedgwick preformed a Prussian blue test.
A sample of Janet's stomach contents were mixed with water and sodium hydroxide.
Then, after adding some ferrous sulfate, the mixture was heated to boiling.
If there was cyanide present, the mixture would turn a deep Prussian blue.
The result was positive.
Cyanide in Janet's stomach meant she had ingested it shortly before her death.
And toxicologists found something else.
Traces of cyanide in Janet's brain tissue - an indication she had ingested cyanide on previous occasions.
Cyanide was found in trace amounts in some herbal and prescription medicines that Janet Overton had been taking.
To see if any of Janet's herbal treatments could have produced the cyanide, Sedgwick tested all of the substances she was taking.
Sedgwick tested all of the substances she was taking.
I ground them up, I tried blending them any way I could, to bring out any cyanide that might possibly evolve from these compounds, and then I smelled them, and I tested them chemically.
I tried blending them any way I could, to bring out any cyanide that might possibly evolve from these compounds, and then I smelled them, and I tested them chemically.
And I found no cyanide in any of the compounds.
Another obstacle was reports that cyanide can be created in blood samples after death.
Before heading to trial, prosecutors needed to know whether the storage process caused the cyanide in Janet's tissues, and wanted testing done by an internationally known expert.
I called Scotland Yard, because Scotland Yard dealt with more poisonings than we did here in the states.
So I called up, and I said 'Do you know of an expert that deals in cyanide that would know exclusively about cyanide', and I was referred to Bryan Ballantyne, one of the foremost experts in the world on cyanide.
The level of cyanide found in Janet's blood sample seven months after her death was 2 micrograms per 100 milliliters of blood.
While that amount was consistent with other fatal cases of cyanide poisoning, Ballantyne's personal standard was much higher.
He studied the storage conditions in the lab containing Janet's tissues, and mathematically determined cyanide's conversion and evaporation rates.
When this was complete, Dr. Ballantyne knew that the cyanide in Janet's system was the result of foul play.
Dr. Ballantyne knew that the cyanide in Janet's system was the result of foul play.
This was a death from acute cyanide poisoning.
The quick acting cyanide that killed Janet had to be administered minutes before her death.
This fact eliminated Janet's lover, Bill Dawson, as the killer, since he had an alibi that he was on his boat at the time of Janet's death.
But if Richard Overton had given his wife the cyanide, where did he get it?
It wasn't long before investigators discovered the answer.
Richard's friend owned a gold and silver mine, and he kept a lab in his house which contained cyanide, since it's used in mining operations to extract precious metal from the raw core.
This individual frequented these mining operations, and while he was gone, Richard would go over to his house, and pick up the person's mail, feed the animals, et cetera.
Richard would go over to his house, and pick up the person's mail, feed the animals, et cetera.
Prosecutors could now prove Richard had access to the murder weapon, and had opportunity and motive.
3 years after Janet's death, Richard Overton was arrested and charged with first-degree murder.
Richard Overton was arrested and charged with first-degree murder.
Richard Overton was charged with the first-degree murder of his wife, Janet.
He insisted he was innocent.
Prosecutors believe that Richard Overton was jealous of the notoriety his wife achieved as president of the local school board.
Their marriage deteriorated when Richard learned that Janet was having an affair - he was hurt.
When you're finished with the working day, and you're married, whether it's a long-term marriage or a short-term marriage, there should be something to come home to.
And in Janet's case, there wasn't anything to come home to.
When Richard discovered that Janet planned to divorce him, he got angry, and sought revenge.
Just as he had done to his previous wife, Dorothy, when she divorced him.
At the trial, Dorothy testified against Richard about her poisoning incident.
Dorothy testified against Richard about her poisoning incident.
Richard Overton also testified in his own defense.
He could not explain, logically, the prior poisoning of Dorothy Boyer, and came off by making a comment that he thought that the poisoning of her was just a neat joke.
And I think that was a damning thing to say, and something that the judge and jury could not understand, in my opinion.
The forensic evidence against Overton was overwhelming.
Not just the toxicology which found the cyanide in Janet's system, but also the forensic document examination of Overton's diaries, which clearly shows Overton's frame of mind at the time of Janet's death.
The theory is that Richard Overton really fixed her a real good cocktail in the morning, with her orange juice.
After she drank it, she was going whale watching with her son Eric, and collapsed in the driveway.
He was very clever, very good, and almost got away with it.
Seven years after Janet's death, Richard Overton was found guilty of first-degree murder.
Richard Overton was found guilty of first-degree murder.
Sadly, in 1999, Dorothy Boyer died of lymphoma.
Dorothy Boyer died of lymphoma.
There's a possibility that the years of selenium poisoning could have caused this.
It's nothing that, right now, science or technology can prove without a reasonable doubt.
We get people off, in our job, as well as finding the guilty, and either one is satisfaction.
But I will have to admit that finding murderers and getting them off the street's a big one.
We had to show the cause of death, and the only way we were gonna show cause of death is forensically.
And the forensics, those are scientists, those are facts, those don't lie.
You can't beat forensics, you can't beat science.
The forensics were very important to this case.
This case was primarily a science case, and if I were to put a number to it, I would say it was probably 90% science and 10% investigation.
In 1993, five men were ambushed at work as they got out of their car.
One man was killed, two others critically injured.
The gunman left behind a few spent shell casings, but little else.
Forensic scientists would eventually find a clue in some scraped metal, revealing a history that someone had tried to erase.
Miguel Roque met his wife on a beach in their native Cuba.
The couple moved to Miami, Florida, in 1991, where they had their first child, a daughter.
She was beautiful.
She's very beautiful.
And then he was worried how to-- to give her the-- the good life to her.
Miguel was willing to work hard to get the good life.
In 1993 the talented mechanical engineer landed a job at the Aircraft Modular plant that made airplane parts.
The 160 employees were a tight-knit group.
And Miguel quickly became one of the family.
I was very impressed that he was here such a short time from his native country, you know, Cuba.
And he knew how to speak English.
He was a go-getter.
He was a go-getter.
He knew what he wanted, and he was going for it.
Miguel and four other employees were identified by management as having the potential for advancement, so the company asked the men to attend computer classes at night.
The men all went to class together and formed a carpool.
October 14, 1993, was a night like any other.
After class, the atmosphere was light and friendly.
I guess we were getting real comfortable in the class.
And we were just joking, different things about work and just-- just funny stuff.
When the car returned to the company parking lot, the driver, Jorge Sanchez, was the first one out.
Doug Zamora was the second.
Then someone started shooting.
Zamora was hit in the arm.
He immediately reached for his own gun.
Sanchez crawled under the car for cover.
Zamora was hit again and ran towards the factory door.
Ray Cruz was also hit.
Another shot exploded through the windshield and hit Miguel Roque sitting in the backseat.
Moussa owned a handgun and frantically tried to load it.
I started shooting out the front, and the gun jammed.
Another blast went through the roof and hit Miguel a second time.
Inside, employees tried to help Doug Zamora, who was quickly losing blood.
Zamora, who was quickly losing blood.
At the same time that I was talking to him, Gerardo Manso came from behind me.
Gerardo Manso came from behind me.
I turned around with my gun, aiming at him.
Manso was almost a casualty.
Luckily, Moussa didn't pull the trigger.
Manso was a night-shift supervisor who heard the shooting and rushed to help.
When police and emergency crews arrived, they first helped Ray Cruz, who was outside and bleeding, but still alive.
Doug Zamora was unconscious.
Miguel Roque was still in the back seat and was pronounced dead at the scene.
My husband was the best man that I know in my whole life, the best man that I know, the best person that I knew, the best father that I saw, the best thing that I have in my whole life.
I lose him.
Apparently, the shots were fired from the roof of the factory.
There were spent shotgun shells but no sign of the gun or the gunman.
Police searched the area by ground and air.
And they even shut down a nearby highway.
But the gunman had made a clean getaway.
Investigators had two questions.
Who would shoot five employees?
And what was the motive?
As police investigated the shooting of the five employees outside of the airplane factory, they found evidence that the shooter had been on the factory roof and made his getaway down the ladder in the back.
The shells found on the roof told investigators the weapon used was a shotgun.
The shells were double-ought buckshot.
Each shell contained nine pellets about the same size as a 32-caliber bullet.
They've been shot nine times at once, because each pellet enters the body and does a lot of damage.
The pellet travels at about a thousand feet a second coming out of the muzzle, so it's like being shot nine times at once.
The shooting killed one man, Miguel Roque.
Douglas Zamora and Ray Cruz were alive, but in critical condition.
Two others, Jorge Sanchez and George Moussa, escaped without injury.
I was angry because, these are the people that I worked with.
They were my responsibility, and somebody had hurt them.
And I was just-- I don't know if it was my adrenaline, but I was really angry. I wanted to find the shooter.
Police began their investigation by asking about any recent firings or disgruntled current employees.
One of the supervisors working on the night of the shooting reported seeing two or three men in a white Cadillac cruising the factory grounds.
This was particularly troubling since one of the shooting victims, Ray Cruz, had a possible link to organized crime.
Ray Cruz had a family member who was currently in a witness protection program testifying against major drug traffickers who had assassinated some government witnesses.
Police wondered whether the factory shooting was a message to the Cruz family, warning Ray Cruz's brother not to testify at that trial.
As police started to investigate that theory, a woman who lived directly behind the factory called to say she had found a gun in her yard.
Because of the police activity in the area, she didn't come outside.
She was fearful that there was something going on and that she should stay inside.
The next morning, when she came outside to feed her cats, she noticed a shotgun, and she called police.
There were no fingerprints on the gun.
And the serial number had been filed off, making it virtually impossible to trace.
It's what we call a robbery gun, where it's easily concealable by removing part of the barrel and removing the stock from the weapon.
Then it's easier to hide on a person.
To see if this was the gun used in the factory shooting, Thomas Quirk conducted a ballistic analysis.
Most guns have lands and grooves inside the gun barrel which leave distinctive marks on the bullets.
But the barrel of a shotgun is smooth.
Without having a rifled bore, there are no marks left behind on the pellets.
We can't identify the pellets.
We can only identify the shot shells themselves.
When a shotgun is fired, the expanding gasses force the shell casings back against what is called the breach face of the gun.
That shotgun will leave marks on the primer of the shot shells over and over and over.
These marks will be the same.
So that's what we call the fingerprint of the weapon.
A microscopic comparison showed that the ballistic fingerprint of the sawed-off shotgun matched the markings on the shells found on the factory roof.
Although this was the murder weapon, it wasn't the type used by organized crime.
It's been more up close and personal, with handguns, so that they are sure that they hit their target, their intended target.
A shotgun is a good close-up weapon.
But from a long distance, because of the way the projectiles scatter, you may not necessarily hit your target.
It didn't appear to be the type of scenario where you have a person on a roof with a shotgun.
It just didn't seem to fit.
The gun and shells were the only physical evidence investigators had.
But the gun still had a story to tell for those who knew how to read it.
Ballistic tests had identified the gun used to kill Miguel Roque and wound Doug Zamora and Ray Cruz.
The question now was, who owned the gun?
The serial number had been removed.
Every mark, the serial number, the brand, the model, the gauge, everything was ground off the weapon.
So we had no idea who the manufacturer was or any of the information, the model or serial number.
The first step was to determine the make and model of the gun.
The gun vault at the Miami-Dade Police Crime Lab holds over 2,000 firearms of various makes and calibers.
Experienced firearms examiners thought it was probably a Remington Model 870 shotgun, so they compared it to the Remington 870 in their vault.
And sure enough, it turned out to be a 12-gauge Remington pump shotgun.
They're-- they're fairly popular here.
And matter of fact, our police officers carry them.
The Model 870 is popular everywhere.
It's one of the bestselling shotguns ever made.
Millions have been sold.
The killer knew that tracing such a gun without a serial number would be all but impossible.
But he didn't know what the crime laboratory can do.
By law, all firearms sold in the United States must have a serial number stamped into the metal.
The number is recorded at the time of sale, allowing any gun to be traced back to the original phone.
When they stamp a serial number into the weapon, it compresses the metal of the weapon.
And it makes the metal underneath the serial numbers harder than the metal around it.
And that's key for serial number restoration.
Quirk smoothed the area of the serial number with a sander to create an even surface.
He then applied a strong acid to the steel.
The smooth surface ensures that the acid eats the steel evenly.
But the area where the metal is compressed, the area directly beneath the serial number that was removed, is denser and resists the acid.
And the next thing you'll see will be white ghost numbers of the serial number raising up through that metal.
With the recovered serial number, Detective McColman contacted the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms.
Detective McColman contacted the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms.
They said the manufacturer had sold the gun to a local sporting goods store.
Subsequently went to that store.
We obtained the ATF form that the purchaser filled out.
The name on the form was Gerardo Manso.
Manso was a night-shift supervisor at the airplane factory and was one of the first employees on the scene on the night of the shooting.
We also brought the form to our questioned documents section in our forensic lab.
The signature on both his work records and the form matched.
Investigators discovered that Manso had been angry because others at work had been promoted ahead of him.
One of those promoted was Doug Zamora, a victim in the shooting I was the foreman of that department.
I was the foreman of that department.
And he thought that he deserved that position.
Unfortunately, he didn't get it.
I believe it's because of his-- his lack of-- not being able to communicate with vendors due to the fact that he didn't speak any English.
That's probably why I got the position, not because I knew more than him.
But everyone believed Manso got over the disappointment since he didn't appear to harbor any lingering resentment.
As soon as all this happened, the one person I turned was-- was Manso.
And I said, Manso, you have to help me now here with everything that's going on, you know.
These gentlemen are in the hospital.
You have to take over.
So during that week, he was the person who was making sure the machines were running.
Gerardo Manso denied he was involved in the shooting.
It was Manso's closest friend, Miguel Roque, who was killed in the shooting.
And Manso had an alibi, since he was seen in the factory immediately following the shooting.
But a background check revealed that Manso had been a suspect in another shooting death.
The victim allegedly was having an affair with Manso's wife.
Police now wondered whether this was a coincidence or a pattern of revenge and murder.
Police now suspected Gerardo Manso in the shooting death of Miguel Roque and injuring Doug Zamora and Ray Cruz.
The murder weapon was a sawed-off shotgun found in the yard of a woman who lived next to the factory.
After raising the serial number, police discovered it was purchased by Gerardo Manso.
And Manso had an interesting background.
We ran Gerardo Manso through that system, and it hit on a previous homicide, a homicide of Mr.
Gutierrez which occurred, I believe, in 1991.
The victim, Luis Gutierrez, had been gunned down while in his car on a deserted stretch of road.
Manso was question because Gutierrez was allegedly having an affair with Manso's wife.
Despite a strong motive, no physical evidence linked Manso to the murder, although Gutierrez had been killed with a shotgun.
Police asked Manso to come down to police headquarters for questioning.
Manso agreed.
After questioning him briefly, detectives asked him to take a polygraph or lie detector test.
Manso consented.
Manso was asked if he knew who was responsible for the shooting and if he was the man who killed Miguel Roque.
His answer, of course, was no, he didn't know, and no, he didn't kill anybody.
There was clear deception indicated on the polygraph to those responses.
Confronted with the polygraph results, Manso broke down and confessed.
Manso broke down and confessed.
But he said he missed his intended targets and instead killed his best friend, Miguel Roque.
And he told the detectives in his confession that he was very upset that Mr. Roque died, because he was not the intended target.
In fact, he was the only friend that Manso had in the business.
He indicated his targets were George Sanchez and George Moussa.
Sanchez and George Moussa.
I think that he regretted that he didn't kill the right people.
Other than that, that's the only remorse that he expressed.
Detectives also questioned Manso about the shooting death of Luis Gutierrez.
He goes, oh, yeah.
You know, two years ago I killed my wife's lover, too, with the same gun.
He fired from inside his vehicle.
Therefore the casing would have remained inside his vehicle.
So the only thing on that scene were projectiles from the shotgun, which cannot be traced.
Manso was charged with two murders, Luis Gutierrez, and his co-worker Miguel Roque.
He was also charged with the attempted murder of the other four men in the parking lot.
Prosecutors believe that what motivated the shooting was resentment at being passed over for advancement.
As Manso did not speak English, he wasn't invited to go to the training session.
He saw this as a threat to his ability to go forward in his occupation.
And so he resented the people that were going.
He especially resented his supervisors, George Moussa and Jorge Sanchez, for holding him back.
So after hours, he used the machinery at work to cut down the barrel of his shotgun and to grind off the serial number.
On the night of the shooting, he snuck up to the roof with the easily concealed weapon and ambushed the men he thought were in his way.
Although Manso says that Sanchez and Moussa were his intended targets, prosecutors don't believe it, since he used a shotgun instead of a rifle.
After the shooting, he threw the gun off the roof into one of the yards near the factory, then hurried down to the factory floor to create his alibi.
There's a ladder that led to the top of the building.
He must have scurried down.
In the confusion, he was able to run out and appear to be concerned.
Now, this would only take a couple of seconds.
When George Moussa saw Manso immediately after the shooting, he had no idea that Manso was the gunman.
I had my gun drawn.
And Manso was right there.
Had I known it was him, the shooter, I would have shot him.
There's no doubt in my mind.
I believe that Mr. Manso is a dangerous man.
And he deals with his frustrations through violence.
It seemed to be the only way he can resolve things, is to eliminate obstacles.
Gerardo Manso was found guilty of murder and attempted murder, and was sentenced to consecutive life terms in prison.
Kenia Roque shares keepsakes and memories of Miguel with their daughter, Laura.
Laura was just 18 months old when her father died, the father who worked long hours to give her a better life in America but never got to share it with her.
Sometimes I feel like it's a bad dream that I had.
It's not real.
I'm not here.
It was another life.
But the only choice that I have is keep busy.
Keep tired, keep busy, study, working, doing many things.
Don't let my mind any space to think about that.
Doug Zamora and Ray Cruz survived their injuries.
Doug's arm was almost amputated, but doctors were able to save it.
The shooting changed the victims.
Doug Zamora quit his job at the factory and went into law enforcement.
He now works as a corrections officer.
George Moussa, impressed by the EMTs who responded to the shooting, also quit his job and is training to become a medic.
Manso believed that by scratching the serial number from his weapon he would remove all traces of ownership.
But forensic technology proved him wrong.
The more forensics that you've got, of course, the better it's going to be.
Forensics really don't lie.
It's-- you know, they don't-- really, they don't make the kind of mistakes that witnesses make.
So it's really pretty exciting.
We linked the casings to the gun, the gun to the man.
It was on a cold, wet, winter night that a woman called police to report her husband missing.
The man was a marathon runner, who had gone for a workout, but never returned.
Forensic evidence revealed that wherever the man went, he ran into some trouble.
Deep in the heart of southern California lies the small town of Valley Center.
About an hour's drive from San Diego, it's a quiet and peaceful community, surrounded by hills and farmland.
The rustic setting appealed to Jane and Robert Dorotek, who had been married almost 30 years.
To Jane, horses were her life.
She obviously was very passionate about her horses, this was one of her great loves.
Bob preferred the outdoors and camping.
His passion was physical fitness, and he was a marathon runner.
The couple had three grown children, two sons, and a daughter, Claire, who still lived at home.
Claire was a marathoner and an expert horsewoman.
On a Sunday night in February of 2000, Jane Dorotek called the sheriff to report her husband missing.
Jane Dorotek called the sheriff to report her husband missing.
She said Bob had gone running a few hours earlier, but never returned home.
When she reported him missing, what was going through my mind - even though he's a jogger, and ran marathons, they do have heart attacks and things like that, sometimes when they're jogging.
It wasn't unusual for Bob to take long runs, but he had never been out this long.
The sheriff and his deputies searched the entire area, concentrating on Bob's usual running routes.
The search was ended at 4:30 the next morning, with the discovery of a body.
I could see some trauma to the head, as well as a cord wrapped around the victim's neck.
My initial thought in looking at the trauma to the body, that this was a homicide.
The lack of blood in the area revealed that Bob's injuries had occured elsewhere.
We found tire impressions in mud, two sets of those, and we found shoe impressions that weren't usable, but they were just like deep holes in the leaf litter that was on the ground.
There were drag marks in the mud, from the area of the tire impressions to the body.
And there was a clue that Bob hadn't been jogging that day.
His shoes were very clean, he didn't have any mud, or any splash marks - water marks - on his shoes.
And the information that I had obtained earlier was that he had went out for a jog on the previous day, which had been a rainy day as well.
A piece of Dorotek's head hair was found underneath his shirt on his chest, suggesting that he had been dressed after death.
And there was another indication that someone else had dressed him.
His shoelaces were tied on the outside of his shoes, the knot itself was not tied in the middle of the shoe, as if somebody were to have tied their own shoe.
Whoever dumped the body left mountains of forensic evidence.
Investigators knew if the killer was this sloppy here, he'd be just as careless elsewhere.
Word of Bob Dorotek's murder spread quickly to friends and family alike.
Forensic scientists began their investigation by attempting to identify the vehicle at the crime scene.
From the tire impressions in the mud, they measured the distance between the wheels.
The vehicle was identified as a pickup truck.
Next, they analyzed photographs of the tire impressions.
First, you have to look at the width of the tire track, there's different size tires, second, you look at the design, every tire manufacturer has multiple tread designs that they make, designed for different types of road handling.
The pickup truck had three different tire models.
The impressions were compared to the thousands of tires on the market.
I noticed that the front two tires were the same brand tire, which was a "Big O" brand.
DeMaria identified the side rear tire as a Firestone Radial, and the passenger side rear tire as a Cooper brand Discoverer model.
At the autopsy, the medical examiner determined that Dorotek died due to blunt force trauma to the head, with some type of hammer.
There were also signs he had been strangled.
Inside his stomach was the undigested dinner Bob consumed on Saturday night, which meant he was killed on Saturday.
Jane said Bob left home on Sunday afternoon.
Despite his mild-mannered demeanor, a background check revealed Bob Dorotek and his wife separated just a few years earlier, although they had recently reconciled.
And Bob had often been at odds with his wife and daughter over the costs of running the horse ranch.
Jane and Claire favored investing more money into the ranch for expansion, and there was the possibility of a disgruntled employee.
Ranch foreman Leonel Morales had long sided with Claire Dorotek in the debate over whether to expand the ranch.
We felt it warranted further investigation.
We had an interview with him to see when was the last time he was there, and what did he do when he was there.
Leonel Morales, Claire and Jane Dorotek all denied any involvement in Bob's murder.
Leonel and Claire each had alibis.
Jane said she was home all day working with the horses.
She cooperated with police by voluntarily allowing them to search her home.
Actually, a homicide detective took me aside before we went in and said "Now Carolyn, this is a consent search, all we're looking for is patent, obvious blood.
Don't be crawling under things and looking up, don't be opening drawers, don't be doing anything, just be as inobtrusive as possible."
It was muddy, so it's a no-shoe house.
So, to be polite in a consent search - and this is the only time, ever in my life, I've done this at a scene - took off my shoes.
Investigators examined the house, and especially the master bedroom, and found nothing out of the ordinary.
But criminalist Carolyn Gannett decided to take a closer look around, and it was in her stocking feet that Gannett made her discovery.
Just happened to step in one corner of the bedroom, and I could feel wet carpet underneath my feet, through my stocking feet, and my heart just jumped because I knew exactly what that was.
The bedroom floor was wet, as if something had recently been cleaned from the floor, and the carpet had a slight tinge of red.
What really struck me was how easily we could've missed it, if we hadn't taken off our shoes we would've missed it, we would not have found that scene at all.
I asked the family if there would be any reason that we would find blood in the master bedroom.
The family members began to speak - one was Jane Dorotek's sister by law, who indicated that one of the dogs had cut his dewclaw and had been bleeding.
Investigators decided to conduct more tests to see if it was dog blood in the bedroom, or something more.
Not long after the murder of 55-year-old Bob Dorotek, investigators had no shortage of forensic evidence or suspects.
In the master bedroom of the Dorotek's home, investigators found traces of blood on the floor, that had been cleaned up.
And when they looked closer, they found even more.
I could see what appeared to be blood spatter all across the comforter of the bed, I could see blood spatter on the headboard, I could see blood spatter on the wall, behind the bed.
I could see blood spatter on the headboard, I could see blood spatter on the wall, behind the bed.
I could see blood spatter on the wall, behind the bed.
And there was blood on the brick wall, and on the stove in the corner of the bedroom.
Some had even dripped down into a utility room below.
I looked at the stains on the wall, stains on the brickwork, and they were all consistent in size - about half a millimeter in diameter, maybe a little bit less, little bit more - with medium velocity. It's what I would expect to have seen in a beating.
Merritt's analysis revealed the blood spatter emanated from the top of the bed, where Bob may have been sleeping.
The shapes of the stains on the wall, and on the nightstand, showed me the direction they were travelling in.
So I just took strings on the wall - knowing the direction they were travelling in - pulled them back, taped them onto the wall, which gave me an area of convergence.
That area of convergence told forensic scientists the location of Bob's head during the attack.
Merritt also found cast-off blood spatter on the ceiling - created when blood is thrown from a moving object.
There were circular stains on the ceiling directly above the bed, that's the first indication of cast-off.
The other indication is directional stains - linear stains - going away from that site.
DNA testing confirmed it was Bob Dorotek's blood.
The attack didn't occur out on that road.
That attack, based on the blood stains, occurred in that room.
Inside the home, investigators also found a piece of black rope, consistent with the rope found around Bob's neck.
I told Jane we were confident, and there was no doubt, that Bob was assaulted in the master bedroom.
And the family gasped.
But investigators found no blood anywhere else in the home.
Meaning, the killer had carried the body downstairs, and out of the house.
Police couldn't find the murder weapon or any bloody clothing inside the home, and there were no signs of forced entry.
An intruder never takes the time to clean a crime scene.
I've been in law enforcement about 28 years, I've not seen or known one case where an intruder has come into a house, murdered somebody inside the house, and cleaned up afterwards.
I've not seen or known one case where an intruder has come into a house, murdered somebody inside the house, and cleaned up afterwards.
Police found a pickup truck in the garage.
There were no visible signs of blood, so investigators looked to see if blood had been removed.
We used fluorescein, we sprayed most of the outside of the truck, and also the inside, and we did find several areas that fluoresced.
There was one area in particular, on the bed of the truck, that fluoresced, it was fairly large.
Which was an indication blood had been present, then, washed off.
DNA testing of the hidden blood residue showed the blood was Bob's.
The front tires were type O brand, the passenger side rear tire was a Cooper Discoverer, the driver's side rear tire was a Firestone Radial.
All were identical to the impressions left at the crime scene.
The white pickup truck was registered to Jane Dorotek.
Before leaving the residence, investigators found one last piece of evidence.
In the trash, there were actually several syringes, and one of the syringes was a large barrel syringe.
Appeared to be a syringe that might be used on animals.
The syringe contained trace amounts of a potent horse tranquilizer, called Acepromazine.
Toxicology tests did not detect acepromazine in Bob's blood sample, although it could have been present in amounts too small for testing to identify.
On the outside of the syringe was a bloody fingerprint.
The blood was Bob Dorotek's.
The fingerprint was Jane's.
You'll often hear it's said that one of the best things you can find at a crime scene is a suspect's fingerprint in the victim's blood.
Now, how do you explain that?
Three days after Bob Dorotek was found dead on the side of a road, his wife Jane was arrested and charged with murder.
Your honor, I'd like to say that I'm innocent.
I loved my husband.
I love him still.
In May 2001, Jane Dorotek stood trial for the murder of her husband Robert.
Prosecutors believe that Jane injected Bob with a horse tranquilizer while he was sleeping on Saturday night.
She then struck him in the head while he was in bed, and then, on the floor near the stove.
When Jane threw away the syringe, she left her fingerprint in Bob's blood.
After dressing the body, she either carried or dragged it downstairs to her pickup truck.
When she left the body alongside the road, she did everything but sign her name to the crime.
The clean shoes were proof he had not been jogging.
The shoelaces showed that someone else had tied them.
And the blood underneath his shirt was proof he had been dressed after he was dead.
And then, there were the tire impressions from her pickup truck.
Friends saw Jane late Sunday afternoon at a nearby shopping center, which is where prosecutors think she threw away her bloody clothes and the murder weapon.
Everything that was collected just pointed the finger at Jane Dorotek.
They're all these different pieces of a puzzle, and when you put it all together, it just pointed the finger at Jane Dorotek.
The motive appeared to be money.
Jane was very interested in spending a lot of money on the horses, the care of the horses, the boarding of the horses.
He didn't mind Jane's hobby, Jane and Claire's hobby with the horses, however, they regularly had disagreements about how many family resources this hobby should use.
Two years earlier, when the couple separated, Jane learned that under California law she would have to pay Bob alimony in the event of a divorce, since she was the primary wage earner.
Jane learned that under California law she would have to pay Bob alimony in the event of a divorce, since she was the primary wage earner.
Bob inititally told me that she was extremely angry about the possibility of having to pay him alimony.
It made her livid.
And that she got very threatening.
We found some letters dated the Friday before he was killed, where he was already looking for a job.
Maybe he said 'this isn't working out, and we should go ahead and get a divorce', and she was not about to pay him any alimony.
At the trial, the defense claimed that Claire Dorotek, with the help of Leonel Morales, killed Bob Dorotek.
They produced a letter Claire wrote to her father filled with deep hostility over alleged abuse.
She just lived her life in trying to please her father, and built up a tremendous amount of hatred and resentment over the years about her relationship with her father.
The defense claimed that Leonel Morales was sympathetic to Claire's position.
It suggested that since he basically worked for Claire Dorotek, and Claire Dorotek didn't like her father, that he would do anything for Claire.
But police were satisfied that each had a solid alibi.
We were confident that Claire was out of town, for the weekend, and Jane was the only one that was home.
And Jane was the only suspect in our mind.
Claire, do you know why your mom is pointing the finger at you?
Claire Dorotek and Leonel Morales invoked their 5th amendment right against self-incrimination, and did not testify.
Jane offered no explanation for how her fingerprint, in her husband's blood, was found on a syringe containing a horse tranquilizer.
After three days of deliberation, the jury returned their verdict.
Find the defendant, Jane Margarie Dorotek, guilty of the crime of murder in the first degree...
I was sad, but I was elated that justice was served.
For me, she stole one of my best friends away from me, and from all his other friends.
And it was the worst kind of theft, really.
Jane Dorotek was sentenced to 25 years in prison.
There was no dispute about the critical role forensic evidence played in Jane Dorotek's conviction.
The forensics made it clear he wasn't out for a jog as she explained, the forensics made it clear his shoes were tied and his clothing was put on after that body was pummeled.
And so, the forensics told a story, as so often as true when you find a body in a homicide case.
The body itself tells a story.
For three terrifying weeks, the eyes of the world were on Virginia and Maryland.
A serial sniper terrorized the community, 13 people were hit - 10 of them died.
13 people were hit - 10 of them died.
This is how forensic science and solid police work combined, to solve the case.
On October 2nd, 2002, police in Montgomery County, Maryland were investigating a number of shooting deaths.
55-year-old James Martin was felled by one bullet, while putting groceries into his car.
39-year-old Sonny Buchanan was killed by a single gunshot, while mowing a lawn.
A 54-year-old cab driver was gunned down while filling his car with gas.
All looked like the work of the same perpetrator.
Police knew each victim was shot from 100 to 200 yards away, but they didn't know where the shooter was located.
The FBI used television and film animation software to build models of the crime scenes, to determine where the shooter was positioned.
And since the shooter got away cleanly, some believed that two people were involved - a spotter, and a shooter.
My theory was that there was a driver with them, that that's how he was getting away - you kill one person, you kill two people - I think that would be a pretty good day, y'know, for a normal psychopathic murderer, but now you go onto the third and the fourth, within two hours, so at that point I felt as though there were two people.
I think that would be a pretty good day, y'know, for a normal psychopathic murderer, but now you go onto the third and the fourth, within two hours, so at that point I felt as though there were two people.
The fourth victim was 34-year-old Sarah Ramos, shot and killed while sitting on a bench, outside this post office.
A 25-year-old nanny was shot at another gas station.
And 72-year-old Pascal Charlot was shot and killed while crossing a Washington, D.C. street.
A witness reported seeing an older model four-door Chevrolet leaving the area of the shooting, with its lights off.
And these last three shootings provided police with their first forensic evidence.
Bullet fragments removed from the victims were large enough for forensic analysis.
We do what was called a fracture parts match, in an attempt to see if the- It's basically like trying to assemble a jigsaw puzzle.
It's basically like trying to assemble a jigsaw puzzle.
As the bullet goes through the barrel, the lands and grooves inside mark each bullet.
The sniper was using .223 caliber bullets.
The marks on fragments from the last three victims were all from the same weapon.
The bullets were hollow point bullets, designed to do considerable damage.
And that's the idea behind a hollow point bullet, is to increase the frontal area of the bullet by opening up.
This goes out at about 3400 feet per second, when it hits a body, it traumatizes the body just from the impact alone.
Then it tumbles around in the body.
The next day, a 43-year-old woman was shot in a shopping center parking lot.
This time, farther south - in Spotsylvania County, Virginia.
Fortunately, she survived.
Some witnesses said they saw a white van or truck in the vicinity of the shootings.
But with few other leads, investigators hoped the new science of geographical profiling would help identify the killer.
A serial sniper had already shot seven people in Virginia and Maryland, and many in the community were starting to panic.
Investigators had little physical evidence, so they turned to some newer techniques of crime solving.
Now we're starting to see development of tools for policing from the social and the soft sciences, psychology, criminology, sociology.
Investigators asked Kim Rossmo to do a geographic profile of the killer.
Rossmo is a former Canadian police detective, who invented the computer software that's used.
Serial and stranger crimes have a problem with information overload.
Too many suspects, too many tips.
It's not uncommon for these lists to be in the hundreds, or even thousands.
It's like the classic 'needle in the haystack' problem, they may be there but where do you start?
Rossmo believes that criminals operate within a predictable distance from where they live.
So, he entered the locations of all the shootings into his computer program - which contains information gathered from thousands of earlier case studies.
Criminals are lazy - now, criminals are also concerned about committing crimes too close to their home.
So there'll be a bit of a buffer zone around there, but, there's a point where their desire to operate in their comfort zone balances their desire for anonymity.
The computer maps where that balance occurs.
And then the computer system generates for us, after a number of calculations - up to a million, what's called a 'jeopardy surface.' A three-dimensional probability surface showing us the most likely location of offender residence.
A three-dimensional probability surface showing us the most likely location of offender residence.
The crime scenes are shown in yellow, or green.
The perpetrator's likely home is shown in red, or orange.
Police also asked the FBI for a behavioral profile of the sniper.
Both the strength and weakness of behavioral profiling is that it's based primarily on the study of individuals who have committed past crimes, and identifies what is common among them.
Based on past criminal history, behavioral profilers say a spree killer is usually a white male, in his late twenties to early thirties, high school educated, and is most likely divorced.
No profile can solve a crime.
You need physical evidence, a witness, or a confession to do that.
But police were certain of one thing: The killer, or killers, were watching the media.
The killer, or killers, were watching the media.
It's common that they follow it, in the media, they often may interject themselves into the investigation, in some way.
Again, that kind of feeds their ego.
So he may have been watching when Chief Moose assured the public that area children were safe.
On October 7th, the sniper shot and wounded an 8th grader, as he entered his school.
Anxious parents questioned whether their children were safe at all.
But now, we're stepping over the line.
In a wooded area, 150 yards from the school, police found a cover to a pen, a shell casing, and a tarot card - the kind used in fortune telling.
The shell casing was a .223 caliber, a very common round, which can be fired from many different rifles.
The killer left the 'death' card, inscribed with the words, "Dear Policeman, I am God."
Within days, there were three more shootings.
53-year-old Dean Meyers was killed at a gas station near Manassas, Virginia.
Then, Kenneth Bridges, at a gas station in Fredericksburg, Virginia - as a policeman stood just 50 yards away.
Then, FBI analyst Linda Franklin was killed in the parking lot of a hardware store.
Witnesses continued to report seeing a white van or truck in the vicinity of the shootings.
One tool from the federal government was a high-tech military surveillance plane, able to detect the burst of flame made by a rifle when fired.
But it didn't help.
The next shooting happened far from the surveillance area, a man was shot and wounded outside a steakhouse in Ashland, Virginia - 90 miles from Washington.
90 miles from Washington.
He's willing to change his M.O., while he listens to the media - that's one way we know that he's careful in taking his notes, and doing his reconnaissance.
In the woods next to the restaurant, the sniper left another message, with an ominous warning.
After the 12th shooting in a horrifying spree, the sniper left another note.
It was a four page letter enclosed in a plastic bag, along with a shell casing.
The letter demanded 10 million dollars, to be transferred into a credit card account belonging to an Arizona bus driver - whose wallet had been stolen prior to the attacks.
After 10, 12 shootings, he decides he wants money now.
I think the money aspect of it is an afterthought, it's just like, y'know,  I'm in charge of everybody, I got life and death in my hand, well why not ask for 10 million dollars?
I got life and death in my hand, well why not ask for 10 million dollars?
Why not ask for a billion dollars?
What tends to get people in trouble is their own narcissism - you give somebody enough rope and they eventually hang themselves.
Riddled with poor grammar and misspellings, the four page letter referred to 'us' - indicating more than one person was involved.
The note warned that if the demands were not met, more shootings would follow.
The next morning, 35-year-old Conrad Johnson was killed as he was stepping out of his bus.
35-year-old Conrad Johnson was killed as he was stepping out of his bus.
A note, similar to the previous one, was discovered in a wooded area close to the site.
The snipers also made repeated attempts to make contact with investigators through the 'sniper tip line'.
Most were messages beginning with "Call me God."
But it was another piece of communication that gave the killers away.
The sniper called a Catholic priest in Ashland, Virginia, asking for forgiveness for the sniper shootings, and also mentioned a murder he committed in Montgomery, Alabama.
Interestingly, police in Montgomery, Alabama had an unsolved murder.
A month earlier, two employees of a liquor store had ben shot - one fatally, while locking up the store for the night.
Kellie Adams survived the shooting, but, she didn't see the shooter.
Witnesses saw one of the suspects drop a magazine while running from the scene.
Forensic experts in Alabama tested the magazine for latent fingerprints, using a series of techniques including magnetic powder, and the chemical ninhydrin.
They also tried superglue fuming.
In an airtight chamber, a small amount of superglue is heated, which vaporizes, then attaches to biological materials.
These techniques produced several usable fingerprints, which federal authorities scanned into the computer system called AFIS.
The AFIS system is actually an acronym for Automated Fingerprint Identification System.
Automated Fingerprint Identification System.
What it is, it's a computer that will actually scan a pattern type of a latent print.
The computer makes millions of comparisons that would take a human being years, and uses numerous government databases.
In the immigration database, investigators had a match.
The fingerprints on the magazine belonged to 17-year-old Lee Boyd Malvo, an immigrant from Jamaica.
17-year-old Lee Boyd Malvo, an immigrant from Jamaica.
Police later learned his nickname was 'Sniper' - given to him by a man who used to date Malvo's mother, 41-year-old John Muhammad.
41-year-old John Muhammad.
Malvo and Muhammad had once lived in this house in  Takoma, Washington.
Neighbors said they often heard gunfire from the home's backyard.
Lee Boyd Malvo and John Muhammad were now the prime suspects.
But where were they?
And could they be found before they killed again?
A telephone call from the killer, a fingerprint from a magazine cover, and ballistic tests had led police to two suspects - 17-year-old Lee Boyd Malvo, and 41-year-old John Muhammad.
17-year-old Lee Boyd Malvo, and 41-year-old John Muhammad.
A check of motor vehicle registrations revealed Muhammad owned a 1990 Chevrolet Caprice, with New Jersey licence plates.
Information that was released to the media.
Just a few hours later, an alert truck driver noticed the car in a highway rest stop.
Police arrested Malvo and Muhammad without incident.
The two had been sleeping in the car.
In the trunk, police found a semi-automatic Bushmaster rifle, with a small tripod, and a scope.
Also in the car was a laptop computer, and a Global Positioning Satellite Receiver, or GPS.
Satellites in space can instantly locate a car with a GPS receiver, and provide maps of the area, ensuring a quick getaway.
On the laptop computer were drafts of letters with language similar to previous communications from the snipers.
Also in the computer were directions to locations of the attacks, some marked by a skull and crossbones.
And investigators found a list entitled "People to Die Later", on it were the names of the Ashland, Virginia priest, and someone at a local radio station.
The rifle from Muhammad's car was sent to ATF headquarters, to principal examiner Walter Dandridge.
And the lands and grooves of the rifle matched the bullet fragments taken from the victims.
The only fingerprints on the rifle were those of Lee Boyd Malvo.
However, both suspects were found to be sources of DNA lodged in the ridges of the rifle scope on the murder weapon.
Malvo's DNA was also found on the pen casing found near the school shooting.
Muhammad's DNA was discovered on the plastic bag containing the letter found in Ashland, Virginia.
The car was modified to conceal the sniper's actions.
To illustrate how, Forensic Files obtained an identical car, and had its trunk and rear seat modified in the same way as police found the sniper's car.
Forensic Files obtained an identical car, and had its trunk and rear seat modified in the same way as police found the sniper's car.
There was a 4 inch hole cut in the trunk, and a portion of the backseat was missing.
As this demonstration shows, a shooter could easily get inside the trunk and fire through the hole.
This is the view looking through the scope of a rifle.
Combine that with the anonymity of shooting through a hole in a car trunk, and a driver leaving the scene within seconds of the shooting, and it's easy to see how they could get away so cleanly.
Even a policeman standing near the car might not have noticed anything suspicious.
Any muzzle flash would've been sheltered from aerial surveillance.
Geographic profiling had assumed the snipers lived near the first group of victims, in a way, they did.
The mobile bunker they called 'home' allowed them to reach the balance geographic profiling counted on, near to home, but also anonymous.
But there was still a question of why the killings occurred.
There's gotta be a more- People just go out and kill people.
People just go out and kill people.
Muhammad's ex-wife thinks she knows.
She thinks the killings were a setup, so that when Muhammad killed her, it would appear to be a random killing by the sniper.
Muhammad's wife lived in Maryland, near the jeopardy area identified as the killer's comfort zone by the geographical profile.
Forensic evidence is very important to prosecute the case, never ever profiler, never clairvoyant, we don't play that.
What you play is hard detective work.
John Muhammad and Lee Boyd Malvo were both tried and convicted of two counts of capital murder.
Muhammad was also convicted of conspiracy to commit murder, and of a firearms violation.
Muhammad was sentenced to death.
Malvo was sentenced to life in prison.
The courts more and more like to see hard physical evidence, and forensic evidence and ballistics in particular can provide that, because there can really be no question if a particular bullet is matched to a particular gun, that can put the smoking gun into somebody's hand.
A 12-year-old girl is murdered in her own home and the case stalls when investigators find little forensic evidence at the crime scene.
But scientists also know that criminals unknowingly take evidence with them as they leave a crime scene.
And in this case, the killer left with the genetic fingerprint of his victim.
In between two of Minnesota's 10,000 lakes is the small town of Waseca, a quiet community with virtually no violent crime.
Not far from the shores of Loon Lake was the home of Connie Larson and her three daughters.
They're all like five and four years apart.
Um, but they are very close.
You-- they were never apart.
And they just adored each other.
Cally was definitely the baby of the family.
And, uh, she was daddy's little girl.
12-year-old Cally Jo was in the seventh grade and loved gymnastics.
She was good, I think, because she just loved it.
And she put a lot of energy into it.
It was a wonderful place for her to be.
And with her energy and spirit she just, um, she just really did well in gymnastics.
After school on April 20, 1999, Cally Jo got off her school bus and walked down this path towards home, just as she always did.
Cally Jo got off her school bus and walked down this path towards home, just as she always did.
Cally Jo was the first one home that day.
Her mother and sister were expected later.
The rule in the family was everyone needed to be home and no visitors at 5:00, because that's when I arrived home and then we had our family time.
16-year-old Jamie was the next family member to arrive home.
When she opened the door, she saw evidence of a burglary and something far worse.
Jamie immediately called her mother at work and then police.
I realized that there was something wrong and she wasn't telling me.
Coming around the corner and looking up the stairs was a difficult sight for everybody, I mean, there were 30-year investigators that were having a difficult time with that.
Um, but it's just looking at who would do something like this.
Upstairs, Cally Jo was dead.
The fatal stab wound was, uh, in the left chest area-- severed the, or cut the ascending aorta.
And she bled to death internally.
It's still hard for me to think that she's gone.
I mean, that means dead.
That's just-- it just can't be.
I've got two kids of my own.
If somebody-- if this occurred to one of my children, I don't know what I would do and I can't even imagine.
I don't know what I would do and I can't even imagine.
Cally Jo's school books were near the front door, and indication that she may have surprised the intruder.
The point of entry was the basement door.
Some cash, silver certificates, and the girls' CD collection of music were missing.
Forensic scientists found blood on the stairs, which was collected for analysis.
Despite the clutter, investigators also looked for fingerprints.
You kind of tend to focus on the areas where you're pretty sure that the perpetrator was.
And then you focus on areas where drawers were tossed and stuff has been, you know, taken out and moved around.
There weren't too many surfaces left in that house that did not have some kind of fingerprint powder residue.
Investigators vacuumed the carpeted floors for possible trace evidence.
They were convinced that the killer had left behind enough forensic evidence to catch him.
We had a lot of fingerprints.
There were hundreds of hairs in those vacuuming.
I initially thought that we were in good shape.
A forensic case is like a puzzle.
And you are trying to find different pieces of the puzzle that fit to give you the picture as to what happened in the case.
Cally Jo Larson's death set a sad precedent for Waseca, Minnesota.
The small town had never had a homicide in its history.
It destroys the-- the safety factor of everybody in this town. Everybody.
Well, I think a lot more people started locking their doors.
Um, which sounds a little flippant, but that's the reaction.
Forensic scientists thought the blood on the steps near Cally Jo's body may have been the killer's.
But forensic tests revealed it was Cally Jo's.
Next, the investigators hoped the killer left his fingerprints in the home.
But this was another dead end.
When all the dust had settled, so to speak, all of these latent prints that we had taken out of the house were identified to family members and friends.
There were no unknowns left.
One of the fingerprints found on the bathroom sink was initially difficult to identify.
But later it was identified as Cally Jo Larson's fingerprint.
Over time, Peterson would come to easily recognize Cally Jo's unique pattern.
She had a loop pattern.
But it had another loop that was over the first loop and kind of came to a point on the other end.
That's unique.
You don't see that very often.
The only other physical evidence from the crime scene were two foreign hairs, one found on Cally Jo's body, the other on the carpet.
But until you know whose hairs to compare them to, you've got nothing.
And the hairs didn't have any root material, so they couldn't be sent for nuclear DNA testing.
A neighbor reported seeing an unfamiliar man near the Larson home around the time of the murder.
This is the composite sketch of the man.
Another neighbor saw a black pickup truck in the area.
Police searched their records for individuals matching this general description, who also had a past history of burglary and sex offenses.
They found 12 potential suspects.
The significant fact about Blom was that he was also a suspect in the kidnapping and murder of 19-year-old Katie Poirier, a convenience store cashier in Moose Lake, Minnesota, just a few hours' drive away.
Poirier, a convenience store cashier in Moose Lake, Minnesota, just a few hours' drive away.
These are security camera pictures of that abduction.
Unfortunately, they weren't clear enough to identify the abductor.
Police learned that Blom made several trips to Waseca around the time of Cally Joe's murder.
He also drove a black pickup truck like the one seen near Larson's home.
And I was being bombarded with so many truths that I didn't want to know.
So as I heard more about Donald Blom, I-- I suppose the more fascinated we became with the possibility that it could be.
I-- I suppose the more fascinated we became with the possibility that it could be.
Blom denied any involvement in Cally Jo's death and said he had an alibi for the day of the murder.
As winter approached in Waseca, hope faded.
November and December was a very bleak time.
Everybody was very depressed.
Despite more than 30,000 pages of reports and boxes of physical evidence, investigators weren't any closer to solving the crime then the day it occurred.
And at that point, we had absolutely nothing.
And I was really becoming concerned whether this case was ever going to be solved.
And soon police in Waseca were faced with another crime problem.
There were a rash of home burglaries in Waseca, not far from the Larson home.
And the perpetrator left behind some evidence-- a shoe impression from an athletic shoe, which had a distinctive zigzag pattern.
A lot of the burglaries had been happening on my shifts and, uh, it was becoming very personal.
On a routine patrol near the burglaries, Officer Markeson spotted a man walking along the sidewalk.
Officer Markeson spotted a man walking along the sidewalk.
As Markeson drove past, the man abruptly changed direction.
It just didn't make a whole lot of sense.
Just-- it just kinda rose the-- rose the hair up on the back of my neck.
So Markeson stopped the man to ask a few questions.
Can I talk to you for a minute?
When he did, he noticed something familiar.
And Markeson was able to look down and saw the shoe print in the snow.
And that looked like the shoe print that they'd been seeing from some of those burglaries.
And while patting him down, found a large screwdriver and a flashlight in his pocket-- burglary tools.
There's no good reason for this guy to be walking in this neighborhood at 8:00 at night with a screwdriver and a flashlight in his pocket.
The man was identified as Lorenzo Sanchez, an illegal immigrants from Mexico.
In his home, police found stolen property from several burglaries.
And police couldn't help but wonder whether Lorenzo Sanchez was also the man who had killed Cally Jo Larson.
Not surprisingly, with the arrest of Lorenzo Sanchez, the Waseca burglaries stopped.
In Sanchez's home, police found items stolen from the burglaries.
They also found many compact discs, but not the ones stolen from Cally Jo Larson's home.
In the bottom of Sanchez's closet, police found two CD cases.
On a hunch, they were photographed and shown to Connie Larson.
An officer came over with a picture of the CD cases and said, they saw these.
And I just want you to look at them, and just tell me if you recognize them.
And I took this picture and I said, yes, those are-- those are Cally's.
Sanchez denied the cases were stolen and said they were his.
I bought those in the store.
It had been almost a year since Cally Jo's murder.
And investigators hoped there may be some forensic evidence on the CD cases.
The first problem was that the outside cover was vinyl.
Just getting the latent fingerprints off them is-- is slim to none, to begin with.
If you do get one, getting one that's a good, usable, identifiable, latent fingerprint is even slimmer.
Nevertheless, the cases were sent to Dave Peterson for analysis.
And I got to the second of the last page of the second CD case.
I opened it up and there was a blond hair laying in between the sleeves.
Now, I got a little excited about that.
Uh, in fact, my heart started racing just a hair.
Pardon the pun.
That hair was sent for DNA testing.
Next, Peterson wanted to see if there were any fingerprints on the plastic sleeves which hold the individual CDs.
For that, he used a technique called super glue fuming.
I suspended these two CD cases from a rod and then fanned out these plastic sleeves that were on the inside.
And what happens, the super glue fumes, as they are emitted from heat, will adhere to the moisture left behind on the latent print and turn the ridge detail white.
Peterson found only one print on the very last sleeve of the second CD case.
The print had a distinctive overlapping loop, one Peterson immediately recognized.
The analysis confirmed that it was Cally Jo's right ring fingerprint.
Cally Jo's right ring fingerprint.
And at that point, I called Bob Berg and said, I think I got something for you.
I think I got something for you.
I said, you've got to be [bleep] me.
I knew that it was our guy at that point.
I knew it was him.
We weren't finding the suspect's fingerprint on something to put him at the scene.
We kind of did this in reverse.
We found him in possession with something that came from the scene.
The blond hair found in the CD case was further confirmation.
DNA tests showed it belonged to Cally Jo.
Despite the evidence, Sanchez denied he was involved in the murder.
All the evidence proved was that Sanchez was in possession of a piece of stolen property.
Did you kill Cally Jo Larson?
But police had one last piece of evidence, the two foreign hairs recovered from the Larson crime scene.
Those hairs, along with a hair sample from Lorenzo Sanchez were sent to the forensic lab for the newest DNA test available.
DNA test available.
Mitochondrial DNA is a specialized DNA test.
If you cannot obtain results using nuclear DNA analysis, you'll fall back on mitochondrial DNA testing.
Mitochondria live outside the cell nucleus.
For the test, each hair sample is placed into a vial where it changes form into a liquid.
The impurities are extracted, leaving only purified DNA.
Next, millions of copies are made of just the mitochondria portion and then sequenced.
When completed, Dr. Holland could read the genetic code of the hairs from the crime scene.
And so this particular piece of the puzzle suggested that those hairs were, in fact, from Mr. Sanchez.
The question was, which Mr. Sanchez?
Mitochondrial DNA is passed from a mother to her children, all of whom will, therefore, have the same mitochondrial DNA profile.
In other words, the suspect, Lorenzo Sanchez, would have the same mitochondrial DNA as his six brothers and sisters.
To complicate matters, Lorenzo's younger brother, Miguel, also had a police record and was in Waseca at the time of the murder.
The investigation into Cally Jo's murder wasn't over yet.
I am innocent of that cause.
I did not kill her.
It is an injustice what they are doing with me.
Lorenzo Sanchez continued to maintain his innocence in the murder of Cally Jo Larson, even though CD case with Cally Jo's fingerprint was discovered in Sanchez's home.
And two hairs found at the crime scene had the same mitochondrial DNA profile as Lorenzo Sanchez.
Mitochondrial DNA is not positive identification, as nuclear DNA is.
Since mitochondrial DNA is passed from a mother to her children, all of the Sanchez siblings would have the same mitochondrial DNA profile.
Two of Lorenzo Sanchez's brothers had spent time in Waseca.
A younger brother, Miguel, and an older half brother, Pedro.
Pedro said he had an alibi.
That he was in Mexico on the day of Cally Jo's murder, which checked out.
Jo's murder, which checked out.
Miguel Sanchez was in Waseca that day, but his time sheet showed that he was at work at the time of Cally Jo's murder.
Lorenzo was the only Sanchez brother with no alibi.
His work record showed that he was not at work when the murder occurred.
With that, Lorenzo Sanchez was charged with first-degree murder.
He maintained his innocence until his sister-in-law visited him in prison and the two had a conversation that was taped by prison officials.
He specifically says in that conversation, you know, the only thing that they have to link me is the hair.
You understand?
The hair is the only thing they've got.
And Sanchez asks his sister-in-law to place the blame for Cally Jo's murder on his half brother, Pedro.
She refused.
Well, there was some-- apparently some sibling rivalry And his brother, Pedro, had a record, which included some violent offenses.
And his brother, Pedro, had a record, which included some violent offenses.
When Lorenzo Sanchez was confronted with the tape of this conversation, he had few choices.
He eventually plead guilty to first-degree murder and was convicted.
When Cally Jo walked into her home and saw Sanchez in the middle of a burglary, Sanchez silenced the person he thought was the only witness.
Sanchez silenced the person he thought was the only witness.
But there was another witness that day-- forensic evidence.
The microscopic hairs Sanchez left behind and Cally Jo's hair and fingerprint on the CD case told the story.
At his sentencing, Connie Larson finally had her chance to speak directly to her daughter's killer.
When his confession, and then in his statement after asked us to forgive him.
Well, um.
You know, that's a-- when you haven't been in this place, it's hard to know what you would do.
But being in this place, um, it hasn't been hard for me.
Honestly, on that day I put it down.
Two years after the crime, Lorenzo Sanchez was sentenced to life in prison.
Lorenzo Sanchez was sentenced to life in prison.
I don't know where to start.
Today, Connie Larson works as a social worker with families who've lived through traumatic events.
She's also become an advocate for better databases to track criminals like Lorenzo Sanchez who often slip through the cracks.
Cally Jo is never far from her thoughts.
We talk about her constantly.
We tell stories about her.
We read her notes. [laughing] Um, she is just a part of what we're doing now, today.
Without the forensics, we had nothing.
This case was to live or die by the forensic evidence.
Well, It was absolutely critical.
We would have not had a case without that forensic evidence.
Lorenzo Sanchez would never been convicted of the murder of Cally Larson without it.
She was home alone making the dress she planned to wear on her Friday night date.
But she had an uninvited visitor.
It took 24 years before forensic science could identify the individual who was there that fateful night.
It was 1962.
President John F Kennedy was leading the country at the height of the Cold War.
The world anxiously watched as the United States confronted the Soviet Union over suspected missile sites in Cuba.
All ships of any kind bound for Cuba, where they're found to contain cargoes of offensive weapons, be turned back.
Racial tensions in the United States weren't as easily deflected.
Desegregation of Southern schools pit blacks against whites.
Leaders like Martin Luther King, JR articulated a message of hope and reason.
I have a dream that some day, this nation will rise up-- Hundreds of miles away, in the small town of Hanford, California, racial tension and the arms race were less important than tending to business and making ends meet.
Hundreds of miles away, in the small town of Hanford, California, racial tension and the arms race were less important than tending to business and making ends meet.
In a small community, everybody knew everybody else.
It was all first-name basis.
Even all the races were all friendly.
The Miller family provided an important service to the community.
They managed the water that was supplied to area farmers.
Very neat family, hard worker, Christian people.
So the Millers were quite well-known.
The canal was located behind their home, and someone from the Miller family was always there to make sure the water system worked properly.
On March 21, 1962, 15-year-old Marlene was the one to stay home while her parents left for a night out.
Marlene planned to finish sewing a new dress for an upcoming date.
Her parents returned home around 10:00 PM.
We'll see you next week!
Good night!
The television set was blaring, A screen was missing from the bedroom window, and there was no sign of their daughter.
A screen was missing from the bedroom window, and there was no sign of their daughter.
Deputy Sheriff O.R. MacFarlane was one of the first to arrive on the scene.
It was obvious that we had a problem.
She was, in fact, missing, and there was some foul play somewhere.
Police found tire tracks on the dirt road near the home, and there was other evidence.
There was a set of boot tracks leading out onto Elder Avenue from the dirt lane.
There was a set of barefoot tracks leading back into the lane, and which got in and out of the car that was parked there.
Nearby, police discovered a pair of mismatched workman's gloves and a belt.
Robert Good was the first journalist on the scene, covering the story for "The Fresno Bee" newspaper.
Once there, he found more than a story.
I started walking down the back a ways.
I walked 100-- 150 feet down the bank and, there she was.
Marlene was floating face down in the reservoir behind the family home.
Marlene's brother, Walt, was searching the area in a police helicopter.
And as we flew over the home, I saw the hearse pull up.
I saw the hearse pull up.
And, uh, at that time, I knew that Marlene had been found.
The autopsy revealed Marlene had been stabbed in the chest, although the wound was not fatal.
There was water in her lungs, so the cause of death was drowning.
Marlene's wrists were tied behind her back with a knot used by most area dairy farmers.
It had this little knot in it.
It was something that you could do very quickly, and, uh, keep the cow from kicking him.
There were no signs of sexual assault, but bruises on the body suggested Marlene bravely fought her attacker.
Marlene bravely fought her attacker.
In a search for witnesses, one of Marlene's high school classmates told police he saw a strange car near Marlene's house around the time of her murder.
He said it was an aqua-type blue fenders.
He liked the paint on the car.
Black on the hood and black on the top and black clear down the trunk.
High school kid, that kind of-- you know, '53 Plymouth looked pretty good to him.
Police had tire impressions at the crime scene and a description of the car.
Now all they had to do was find it.
A witness saw a 1953 black and turquoise Plymouth parked near Marlene Miller's home on the night of her murder.
Within hours, police found it.
I remember Hanford Police Department came up with a car of that description parked in front of the Royal Hotel in downtown Hanford on 7th Street.
When Deputy Sheriff McFarlane peered inside the rear window, he saw what would later become a crucial piece of evidence.
I could see a pair of boots back there.
One was sitting flat, and the other was on its side.
And with a flashlight, I could see that the tread looked to me like the same tread that was out there in Tome Lane.
The car was registered to Booker T Hillery, Jr, a local dairy worker who had recently been released from prison for a previous rape conviction.
One of his coworkers told police that he saw Hillery driving towards Marlene Miller's home after work on the night of her murder.
And Hillery's employer identified the gloves found at the crime scene as the ones Hillery wore.
The tires on Hillery's car, and the boots found in the backseat, were similar to the tire and boot impressions in the soft mud near the crime scene.
But that doesn't mean that he killed her, even though the gloves were pitched out down the road where the car tracks had-- that looked like his went.
So everything was circumstantial.
There was no real evidence to put him in the home.
Booker Hillery denied any involvement in Marlene's murder.
Hillery said he drove by the Miller's home every day since he worked at the dairy farm just down the road.
He said his tire and shoe impressions in the area meant nothing.
Booker Hillery was arrested, tried, and convicted of Marlene Miller's murder.
He was sentenced to death.
Once in prison, Hillery took full advantage of the appellate process and petitioned to have his conviction overturned.
It was discouraging, especially for the family that had to constantly relive this nightmare every time this case would come up.
Each time that we go through this process, I keep thinking that maybe this is the last process that they will have to endure.
I keep thinking that maybe this is the last process that they will have to endure.
And, uh, they just keep coming and coming.
It's frustrating.
Sometimes the criminal justice system to a police officer is frustrating, all right?
Every appeal Hillery filed was unsuccessful.
But in 1974, the United States Supreme Court ruled the death penalty was cruel and unusual punishment.
As a result, the sentences of everyone on death row, including Booker Hillery, were commuted to life in prison.
The Supreme Court reversed their decision two years later, but the commuted death sentences couldn't be reinstated.
Booker Hillery's legal maneuvering continued.
He appealed his conviction once again, this time claiming that blacks had been excluded from the grand jury that indicted him.
In 1983, a judge granted that appeal and ordered Hillery either to be retried or released.
What is disturbing about it is that this was in 1983.
The conviction occurred in 1962.
And anyone can review the transcripts of the grand jury hearing and determine that no matter what race you are, you will find probable cause.
Robert Maline was the prosecutor in Booker Hillery's retrial.
I knew that I had to find out exactly what proof I needed because I obviously had to retry this case, and I had to retry it 24 years after the first conviction.
I needed because I obviously had to retry this case, and I had to retry it 24 years after the first conviction.
The physical evidence still existed, but 21 of the original witnesses were now dead.
Larry Orth was the chief investigator for the Kings County DA's office.
All the people were dead, and to sit and have to read hundreds of pages of testimony from 1962, '65, 1970-- into a record of a present day trial can almost put you to sleep.
So investigators took the physical evidence and looked at it again-- this time, with some new forensic techniques not previously available-- and found a surprise.
It had been 24 years since Booker T Hillery was first convicted of Marlene Miller's murder, a conviction later overturned on appeal.
Criminalist Gary Cortner examined the physical evidence from the first trial.
He started with the boots found in Booker Hillery's car on the night of the murder.
The boots had been modified, the soles were the originals from the Wellington boot company, but the original white heel had been replaced with a black one.
He did this to keep his shoes from wearing out as fast, and in doing that, he made an-- almost an individual shoe out of it because of the two different components.
Cortner compared Hillery's boots to the shoe impression found near Marlene Miller's home.
They had the same sole, the same custom heel, and the same five individual cut marks in the heel.
Next, Cortner compared the tires from Hillery's car to the tire impressions found on the dirt road near the Miller's home.
We were looking for cuts or rocks or anything that had been in the tires.
And in this case, we were very lucky because there was a manufacturer's defect that was picked up, and there were three cuts in the tires very close to that.
This placed Booker Hillery in the vicinity of the crime scene, but not inside the home.
Larry Orth found something important while reading through the transcripts from the first trial.
On the night of the murder, 24 years earlier, an alert detective asked Marlene's mother to vacuum the carpet in the living room where her daughter was abducted.
At that time, investigators found some unusual microscopic particles in that trace evidence, but they didn't know what they were.
And they said they didn't have the technology to do it, other than just to compare them as far as shape, size, and that was it.
The football-shaped particles found in the vacuum cleaner bag still existed in the evidence file, and were sent for analysis to an independent forensic lab in Chicago.
Skip Palenik was the forensic microscopist assigned to the case.
Having done microscopy since I was eight years old, I had seen particles like this before, and I knew what kinds of physical phenomena produced this.
Under magnification of 300 times, Palenik recognized the particles as paint, the kind sprayed from an aerosol can.
Palenik recognized the particles as paint, the kind sprayed from an aerosol can.
Throughout the particles were cotton fibers.
This explained why the paint particles were round.
When paint is sprayed from an aerosol can, the round particles flatten when they hit a flat surface like wood.
When the paint dries, it creates a film-like covering.
But if the spray paint hits a fiber, it reacts differently.
If these spheres dry around nothing, they just retain that shape because they're spheres.
However, if they come in contact with a fiber, then what happens is capillary forces cause the-- the ends of the sphere-- which starts out like this-- to draw out where they come in contact with a fiber.
Scientists performed an electron probe microanalysis to identify the elements in the paint.
Every element that's in there has its own x-rays that come off.
There are different wavelengths.
And we collect these different x-rays, that are different wavelengths, or different energies, and from their energy or their wavelength, we can tell which elements are present in the sample.
The components were titanium, lead, and iron.
An infrared microspectrophotometer, which looks more like a computer than a microscope, determined the paint's molecular composition.
The results are charted on a graph, and scientists learned that the paint was an oil-based alkyd with a Prussian blue pigment.
Investigators now wanted to know where these mysterious microscopic blue paint particles came from.
And they also needed to know how they got on to Marlene Miller's living room carpet 24 years earlier.
As prosecutors prepared to retry Booker T Hillery for the murder of Marlene Miller, they discovered new forensic evidence-- microscopic paint particles in the victim's home encased in cotton.
But in 1962, at the time of the original trial, the technology to identify these particles didn't exist.
But where did these paint balls come from?
For answers, investigators looked once more inside Booker Hillery's 1953 Plymouth automobile.
Booker Hillery's 1953 Plymouth automobile.
Surprisingly, it was still in police custody after all those years.
In the forensic lab, scientists noticed that the ceiling of the passenger compartment was lined with a cotton material, and the material had been painted with a blue spray paint.
And pulling some of the headliner off and examining it under the microscope, I realized that there were millions of these things that had been manufactured by him, in spraying the headliner.
I realized that there were millions of these things that had been manufactured by him, in spraying the headliner.
And, uh-- and they were still there.
It was kind of like they were there for someone to find, and I was lucky enough to be the one who found them.
Scientists vacuumed the inside of Hillery's car and analyzed the trace evidence.
They found thousands of paint particles identical in color, shape, and chemical make up to those found in Marlene Miller's home.
At the end of all this analysis, what we have are-- first of all, green paint spheres.
The paint is alkyd enamel.
It's the same in both question and known.
It has the same color.
When you crush up little bits under the microscope, they show the same kinds of crystal filler-- crystalline fillers that are inside.
The elemental composition is identical.
The infrared spectrum-- from the molecular composition-- is identical.
They both used Prussian blue.
We couldn't say that, you know, it came from the same spray can.
We're just saying, how did they get there?
They're so unusual in shape.
Why are they in both places?
Investigators suspected that Booker Hillery spray painted the interior roof of his car.
As he did, the round paint particles attached to the cotton fibers and remained cylindrical as they dried.
Driving around town, when Hillery hit a bump in the road, the microscopic particles shed, landing on his clothing and in his hair.
These paint balls just followed him around like a-- like a virus, and he didn't know they were there.
Prosecutors believe that when Hillery entered Marlene's home on the night of her murder, those microscopic paint particles dropped onto the Miller's living room floor.
Marlene's home on the night of her murder, those microscopic paint particles dropped onto the Miller's living room floor.
He became, literally, a walking trace evidence factory.
This evidence placed Booker Hillery inside Marlene Miller's home.
We had everything else outside, and a tenth of a mile away, but the paint balls put him in the house.
That's how important they are.
In 1986, based on this new forensic evidence, Booker T Hillery was tried and convicted once again for the murder of 15-year-old Marlene Miller.
Booker T Hillery was tried and convicted once again for the murder of 15-year-old Marlene Miller.
He was sentenced to the maximum penalty allowed-- 25 years to life, although the judge made it clear that he would have imposed the death penalty if he had been permitted by law to do so.
Ironically, it was Booker Hillery himself who handed investigators the forensic evidence used to convict him.
Local authorities had tried to sell his car shortly after his first conviction in the 1960s, but Hillery wouldn't allow it.
He in turn filed a motion in federal court suing the county to stop them from getting rid of the car.
He dismissed the case, and we decided not to sell it.
And thank you, Mr. Hillery.
When I looked up that day in the garage, and having seen that sprayed headliner was just indescribable.
I said, this is it.
Had he not have saved the car for us, I would have never known where these particles came from.
I would have never known where these particles came from.
Today, Booker Hillery is 71 years old.
He was denied parole at his most recent hearing in January 2003.
Booker Hillery is where he belongs.
He should have been in the gas chamber before this, but for whatever reason, he-- the system didn't take his life, but he is where he belongs.
He does not belong back out in society.
Investigators credit the foresight of the late Art Thomas, the Kings County Chief Criminal Deputy, who, in 1962, insisted that Marlene's mother vacuum the living room floor where the abduction took place.
Thomas, the Kings County Chief Criminal Deputy, who, in 1962, insisted that Marlene's mother vacuum the living room floor where the abduction took place.
He kept that trace evidence in police custody.
That was the key to it, and I know Art knew that was the key to putting him in the house back then.
He was an investigator, and he was a damn good cop.
We can-- uh-- do what some people think can only be done in, uh, works of fiction.
We are, I believe, sort of the living embodiment of Sherlock Holmes and Doctor Thorndike and some of these kinds of people, in that, we can take this little speck of evidence, and literally make it speak.
Holmes and Doctor Thorndike and some of these kinds of people, in that, we can take this little speck of evidence, and literally make it speak.
Two men were murdered while sleeping in their bed.
One night later, an arson fire destroyed a family planning clinic.
Investigators wondered whether some shards of glass, paint chips, and a chicken feather could link what appeared to be two separate crimes.
On the morning of July 1, 1999, Oscar Matson called his son Gary.
No one answered the phone.
But there was an unusual message on the answering machine.
Hi everybody, this is Gary.
We came down with something pretty bad, pretty suddenly, and we're going to have to go back to a-- to a specialist friend of ours in the Bay Area.
We'll see you guys in about a week.
It clearly wasn't Gary's voice.
And at that point, I became very concerned.
Family members drove out to Gary's home.
We came up to the house, and called loudly.
Nobody answered.
We walked in and saw a foot sticking up on the bed.
And at that point, we realized what had happened.
Gary and his partner Windfield Mauder had been shot to death in their loft bed with a 22 caliber pistol.
It was just a tremendous shock when I-- I don't know if I was ever in denial.
I don't know if I was ever in denial.
It was instant depression.
The trail of empty cartridge cases and the location of the blood spatter told investigators where the shooter had stood.
The shooter walked towards the loft.
I think the people in the loft got up to see what was going on.
And then they started being shot.
And the shooter got closer to the loft and then basically finished them off.
It was overkill, basically.
Each of them being shot multiple times like that, It was like somebody was trying to send a signal to us or had something that they wanted to say about how they killed these people.
The killer then recorded a new message on the telephone answering machine saying the two men were away on a trip.
The autopsy revealed Gary and Winfield were killed between midnight and 4:00 AM.
Winfield's car was missing from their home along with Gary's credit card and driver's license.
Gary's family didn't believe the murder was a random act.
We felt very strongly early on that it was a hate crime.
That they were murdered because they were gay.
Because they both were active in gay rights issues.
So we just had a strong feeling.
We just knew it was a hate crime.
I did, anyway.
You know, everybody was looking over their shoulder, you know, wondering what was going on, if they would be next.
I think the fact that someone goes into your home and shoots you to death in your bed disturbed everybody in this community.
Gary Matson and Winfield Mauder had lived together for 16 years and owned a landscaping and nursery business.
They had no known enemies.
Six days after the murders, police found Winfield's car on a deserted road about 100 miles away.
Gary Matson's driver's license and credit card were not inside.
Investigators asked the bank when the credit card was last used, and they got a surprise.
The card had been used after Gary's murder to purchase some gun-related equipment.
They had purchased almost $2,000 in reloading equipment, amateur reloading equipment.
And the person that had made the purchase had requested that it be sent to a PO box in city.
That is really dumb.
Criminals do dumb things.
And you have to wonder whether they have a-- some kind of subconscious urge to be caught.
Investigators set up surveillance hoping the killer would walk into their trap.
When Winfield Mauder and Gary Matson were murdered, the only items missing from their home were Matson's driver's license and credit card.
Immediately after the murders, Matson's credit card was in use.
They used the victim's credit cards within hours of the murders.
The murders were probably committed around 3:00 in the morning on July 1.
And that same day, in the afternoon, they spent about $1,000 in a shoe store.
And they stopped at several other stores and used the credit card.
And the credit card was also used to purchase some gun-related equipment.
The person using the card had the items shipped to a post office box in a town about a two-hour drive away.
Police head straight to the address where the items had been shipped.
Sure enough, they saw two men carrying boxes out of their car.
They were identified as 32-year-old Matthew Williams and his 29-year-old brother, Tyler.
Inside the car, detectives found Gary Matson's credit card and driver's license.
In the brothers' home, police found several newspaper articles about an arson spree that occurred two weeks before Gary and Winfield's murder.
Three synagogues burned on the same night.
All were arson.
And at each one, hate literature littered the crime scenes.
The fliers were found kind of randomly dispersed.
Thrown throughout the synagogue and also on the outside And it almost in a random fashion.
And it almost in a random fashion.
Police found similar literature in the boys' apartment.
Thousands of pages of hate literature, anti-Semitic literature, racist literature.
White supremacist-- all kinds of white supremacist stuff.
Gas chromatography identified the chemical makeup of the accelerant used in the arsons.
In the boys' possession was a book on arson which recommended the same chemical mixture.
A second book described the best techniques for breaking and entering.
It describes the best times to break in, between the hours of 2:00 AM and 4:00 AM.
And all arsons were within that time frame.
And the third book recommended wearing coveralls to commit crime.
Investigators found coveralls in the brothers' closet similar to the ones the book recommended.
Investigators found nothing in the Williams' home that tied them to the murders of Gary Matson and Winfield Mauder.
Matson and Winfield Mauder.
But they found other forensic evidence.
I looked at the suspect's car first.
And probably the only thing that I recovered that was of significance was glass.
The glass appeared to be safety glass, the type used in windows and doors.
When it breaks, you actually have hundreds if not thousands of small particles of glass that will come back towards the-- the pushing, breaking of glass.
And it will become embedded in your clothing even though you can't see it.
In the trunk of the car were two black crow bars.
One had green paint scrape marks.
Could forensic scientists make any scientific connection between the murders, arsons, and the Williams brothers?
It's hard to describe.
To see especially the film footage of the [inaudible] Israel and the flames pouring out of the structure.
Israel and the flames pouring out of the structure.
Initially we looked at the extremist groups in the Sacramento area.
There were several groups such as Neo-Nazis, skinhead, hate groups that had in the past vandalized synagogues and other houses of worship.
As police search for Gary Matson and Winfield Mauder's killer, they inadvertently found evidence linking their murder suspects to the arson fires set to three California synagogues in the same night.
Mauder's killer, they inadvertently found evidence linking their murder suspects to the arson fires set to three California synagogues in the same night.
All of the evidence from Matthew and Tyler Williams' car and apartment was sent to criminalist Faye Springer, an expert in trace evidence.
Faye Springer, an expert in trace evidence.
She started with the glass shards found in the suspect's car.
Glass is not an organic material.
So it's just made from silicon dioxide and sand, basically.
And melted.
So glass varies a lot by refractive index.
And depending on how it's made and what materials go in to making it-- Three wavelengths of visible light are passed through the glass.
Three wavelengths of visible light are passed through the glass.
The reflection of that light is measured under the refractive light index.
Springer compared the glass in the suspects' car to the broken glass at the synagogues.
Glass at the arson at the synagogue was similar to the glass in the suspect vehicle.
It was the same type of glass and it had the same physical properties and chemical properties.
Blue coveralls found in the Williams brothers' home also contained glass fragments.
So did two other objects found in the brothers' car.
The crowbars were sent down to my laboratory because we suspected that the synagogue arsonists either used crowbars or bats.
Eventually we found some glass fragments that were similar to glass that was collected.
Microscopic examination of the crowbars also revealed green paint.
When I called and asked them, you know, where the green paint came from-- because I knew none of the synagogues had green paint on them.
Because I had been all of them.
And they said, well, the only thing that we have is this fire at this medical clinic office building.
The medical office building was actually an abortion clinic which had burned the day after Gary and Winfield's murder.
The abortion clinic had green trim around the doors where the arsonist entered the building.
Springer compared these samples to the paint on the crowbar using pyrolysis gas chromatography.
What it does is it allows you to look at the organic profile of the paint.
And with paints, it's not just one chemical that goes into making a paint.
There's lots of chemicals that go into a paint.
And they give you kind of a profile of what that paint looks like.
And when we analyze it, we look at the combination of all of those materials together.
The paint on the crowbar had the same chemical composition as the paint from the abortion clinic.
So there we had a double transfer from the medical clinic going to that crowbar, and that crowbar going to that synagogue.
Forensic proof that the three synagogue arsons and the abortion clinic arson were connected.
And forensic scientists got lucky with some other evidence.
Not all of the fire bombs placed inside the synagogues ignited.
Extremely fortuitous that you would have unburnt material left at a crime scene.
The surviving fire bombs were plastic containers, a flammable liquid with homemade wicks made of cloth.
But in the cloth were some unusual items, including dog hairs, cat hairs, and even chicken feathers.
When Springer went to the Williams' home, she knew she had something.
I saw the bird cages, and I thought, oh man, they're gonna have one bird of every kind that ever walked the Earth.
I got excited very quickly.
They had three dogs.
They had a chicken coop in the back.
Taking the chicken samples wasn't easy.
We can just scare them so they're flapping all over the place, and then we get the loose feathers.
The hair from the Williams' dog and cat as well as the chicken feathers were microscopically consistent with the hair and feather evidence contained in the wick of the fire bomb.
And the chemical makeup of the light blue paint on the Williams family tool shed matched the blue paint found on one of the synagogue fire bombs.
There was just too many coincidences.
The-- the feathers, the dogs, the same kind of paint.
I had a lot of confidence that these materials were going to show that the bottles came from that location.
With the synagogue and abortion clinic arson solved, there were still two remaining questions.
Did the Williams brothers kill Gary and Winfield, and was there forensic evidence to prove it?
After the two Williams brothers were linked to the four California arson fires, investigators still needed to solve the murders of Gary Matson and Winfield Mauder.
California arson fires, investigators still needed to solve the murders of Gary Matson and Winfield Mauder.
Matson and Winfield Mauder.
What we wanted to do was to see if forensically we could get evidence that would, at a later time, lead us and help us prove which individuals committed the crimes.
Detectives searched a small cottage behind the Williams brothers' parents' home and found guns and a book on how to make a homemade silencer.
A 22-caliber pistol in the brothers' possession had the same homemade silencer.
This had some gray tape or duct tape on the end of it that had had a small hole on the end of that.
And you could actually visually see light through the hole.
On the end of the tape was a tiny speck of blood, which was sent to the lab for DNA analysis.
One of the victims was within a couple feet of the victim when it was fired to put that small droplet on the end of that piece of tape.
Mark Fisher processed the Williams' gun.
The process was a Mark II 22 caliber pistol which I developed three latent impression-- impressions, and ultimately identified all three as being made by James Tyler Williams, the younger brother.
I developed three latent impression-- impressions, and ultimately identified all three as being made by James Tyler Williams, the younger brother.
But was this the gun used to kill Winfield and Gary?
When a cartridge is discharged, the cartridge case itself expands.
And it picks up an impression in the chamber of the gun.
Firearms experts test fired the 22 caliber pistol and compared those spent cartridges with those found in Gary and Winfield's home.
Based on this comparison, I was able to conclude that the Mark II pistol had-- was, in fact, the one that had been used to fire the components at the scene.
II pistol had-- was, in fact, the one that had been used to fire the components at the scene.
Finally, the DNA testing of the blood found on the end of that pistol confirmed the blood was Winfield Mauder's.
The Williams brothers lived only a few miles from the home Gary and Winfield shared.
Gary and Winfield shared.
Prosecutors believe the Williams brothers targeted the couple because they were gay.
Matthew Williams knew Winfield Mauder because they had worked together briefly at the local farmer's market.
Investigators also discovered the brothers were heavily influenced by groups that express contempt for gays, Jews, minorities, and abortion rights.
Jews, minorities, and abortion rights.
They are absolutely a part of that extremist Christian movement that strongly believes that homosexuals are evil and a scourge of the earth.
On September 8, 2001, the Williams brothers pled guilty to arson.
While awaiting trial, Matthew Williams committed suicide.
It's just fine with me that he killed himself.
It's fine with me.
Except for the fact that it would have been nice to have him stand up in court and let the world see what kind of a person he was.
Although they did kill two individuals and cause millions of dollars worth of destruction, they failed to ignite this so-called revolution, this uprising against-- against certain institutions.
His younger brother Tyler pled guilty to arson and first degree murder and was sentenced to life in prison.
Every year, on the anniversary of Winfield and Gary's death, there's a celebration of life and diversity in Redding, California.
Today, in memory of Gary and Winfield, I ask all of you to be teaching respect for people's differences.
This was a case where the forensic evidence identified a trail.
Glass from the arsons gets trapped in the perpetrator's clothing, then transferred to his car seat.
Paint from the abortion clinic and glass from the synagogue is transferred onto the two crowbars found in the suspects' trunk.
A chicken feather, dog, and cat hairs cling to a shirt worn by the perpetrator.
A shirt that's later cut into pieces to make the wick in the fire bomb-- all identified by forensic scientists who often see evidence that to others looks like dirt.
Whether it be the paint chips or the glass fragments or the dog hairs or the chicken feathers, each one is an independent action.
And so then it becomes very significant when you have multiple independent actions all associated to the same place.
It's great for us, because it-- it gives us the assurance that we've got the right people and helps us prove the case at the same time.
While it's made my job easier, it's made it harder for criminals to get away with their acts.
Even smart ones.
When an otherwise healthy young man died mysteriously in his sleep, investigators assumed the suicide note explained why.
It told the tale of heartbreak, deception, and jealousy.
But it told an experts in forensic linguistics something entirely different.
Early one morning in 1992, an emergency medical team responded to a call from a Raleigh, North Carolina apartment.
There, they discovered a young man unconscious in bed.
A closer look revealed he was dead.
This man had no evidence of head trauma, chest trauma, any other injury that might explain why he was dead.
He was otherwise a seemingly healthy young man.
The victim was 23-year-old Michael Hunter, a recent college graduates with a successful career as a computer programmer.
His roommate told police he found Michael unconscious when he tried to wake him up to go to work.
The emergency medical team report stated that he appeared to have gone to sleep and never woke up.
When I found out Michael had died, that was very devastating.
He was just my sunshine, because we had been through a lot together, Michael and I. And, um, so when I found that out, uh, I didn't know how I could go on.
The official autopsy was conducted two days later.
The Initial examination revealed no intrinsic medical condition that would explain his death and no evidence of any injuries that might have any bearing on his death.
At that point, a conversation was made with the chief medical examiner for the state of North Carolina, which determined that perhaps there should be some additional, um, toxicology studies done.
Carolina, which determined that perhaps there should be some additional, um, toxicology studies done.
Toxicology tests of the victim's blood told a different story.
Michael had traces of two different cold medicines in his system, diphenhydramine and hydroxyzine.
He also had a lethal dose of lidocaine.
This is a substance that is injected.
This is not a substance that you take over the counter.
You hear about people accidentally taking ant poison or children accidentally taking medication.
This is not.
Lidocaine is an anesthetic and is sometimes used in emergency medical situations to stabilize heartbeat.
It works very rapidly such that those irregular heartbeats can become normal again very quickly, even before you arrive at the hospital, for example, if you're in an ambulance.
It was a problem.
The emergency personnel were certain that they did not inject anything into Michael in their resuscitation efforts.
They said that they did not administer any lidocaine because Michael was gone and they knew that there was no need to-- to try to do that.
I would find it very unusual for there to be lidocaine in the system of someone that was not undertaken for resuscitation.
Investigators wondered how lidocaine entered Michael's system.
Then, Michael's family learned about their son's secret, a secret that started to bring everything into focus.
Michael Hunter's death devastated his family.
And it wasn't until his funeral that his parents learned the secret their son had been hiding the truth about Michael's sexual orientation.
I had no idea.
I guess I was real naive or something, but I had no idea that, uh, Michael was gay.
Sadly, these revelations on top of Michael's death proved too great for his father Jim.
He could not accept the fact that somebody could kill his son and then he could do nothing about it.
And so this just put him in a depression that he could not and did not come out of.
And he killed himself.
And now Michael's mother mourned the loss of both the son and the husband.
It was just-- just devastating.
But because of the support, I mean, we just pulled together.
And that's-- the support is what got us through.
Michael had two roommates, Garry Walston, a landscape architect, and 26-year-old Joseph Mannino.
He was a medical student at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, had completed his fourth year of medical school, but had not yet taken the licensing exam in North Carolina to be licensed as a physician.
Carolina to be licensed as a physician.
Well, it was an unconventional relationship because, I think, in any sense of a relationship, there are typically only two people involved.
And having a third person involved, I think, brought in a dynamic that was very different and maybe in some ways very exciting.
But it also created problems that I don't think any of us would have anticipated.
In almost every sense of the word, the three roommates considered themselves to be life partners.
All three men had a homosexual love triangle as-- as they describe it.
They actually exchanged rings and promised to, um, remain faithful to each other, and, uh, that was their-- that was their living arrangement.
But it wasn't long before problems developed among the three.
The main problem was that Michael Hunter hadn't been getting along with Joseph Mannino.
Mike and Joe started not getting along with each other, which was difficult for me because I didn't have a problem with either one of them.
Eventually, Garry and Michael decided Joseph Mannino had to go.
We told Joe basically that he was gonna have to move out.
That was I think like a week before Mike was killed.
Previously, all three shared the same bed.
Now Joseph Mannino was relegated to sleep on the living room sofa until he found another place to live.
Garry and Michael had formed a duo that they did not want Joe involved in.
And so things basically fell apart, and Joe found himself the odd man out.
Since Gary was out of town when Michael died, Joe Mannino became the prime suspect.
Joe Mannino became the prime suspect.
As a medical student, Mannino would have had easy access to lidocaine.
And he certainly knew how to give an injection.
Investigators wondered whether the breakup of the love triangle might have given him a reason to kill.
No one knows what happened in the apartment that night except Joe Mannino and Michael Hunter.
And Michael's dead so he can't tell us.
When questioned, Joe Mannino gave police an unexpected piece of information.
He admitted that on the night Michael died, he had given him an injection of antihistamines for his migraine headache.
Antihistamines are an accepted but not common treatment for migraine pain.
These were the same drugs found in the toxicological test.
He says that, I did give him a shot to relax him.
I didn't give him any other shots.
I asked him directly did he give him a shot of lidocaine.
He said no.
Maybe he did have a migraine.
I don't-- I don't know.
And, um, Joe did give him something to put him to sleep, make him sleep sounder.
It was a violation of medical ethics, as well as North Carolina law, for a medical student to administer drugs without a licensed doctor present.
This admission immediately put Mannino's career at risk.
He would have completely thrown away his efforts to become a doctor.
He would never have been licensed.
And investigators discovered another possible clue, a typed letter on the computer desk among Michael Hunter's things.
I started reading them, and they were what can best be described as drafts of suicide letters.
The letter, allegedly written by Michael before his death, said that he suspected that he was HIV positive and was going to kill himself.
Please don't blame him.
Forgive me.
All investigators had to do now was confirm that Michael Hunter had actually written the letter.
And for that, they turned to forensic linguistics.
Suspicions about Michael Hunter's death grew even darker when the suicide note surfaced.
It was unsigned, found on the floppy disk among Michael's belongings.
Investigators wanted to confirm that Michael had indeed written the note and turned to Dr. Carole Chaski, an experts in the field of forensic linguistics.
Here was a document, which was purely electronic.
It was simply a computer file left on a diskette.
There was nothing, uh, physical in the sense of ink or handwriting or paper that was available.
It was almost in a-- in a sense pure language.
Linguistics is not so much the study of what a person says, but how they say it.
How people combine words to make phrases and sentences is known as syntax.
We think what makes individuals' use of language distinctive is the pattern of simple and complex phrases which one individual uses versus the pattern of simple versus complex that another individual uses.
Dr. Chaski was given known writing samples from Michael Hunter and asked to compare them with the suicide note.
Using the new computer program called ALIAS, or Automated Linguistic Identification of Authorship System, Dr. Chaski reduced each document to its most basic component, the individual words.
System, Dr. Chaski reduced each document to its most basic component, the individual words.
The program then rebuilt each phrase from scratch and analyzed how the words were used in relation to each other.
We can get frequencies of how many simple versus how many complex phrases of each type, noun, verb, adjective, and so forth, are in the document.
In the suicide note, Dr. Chaski found a distinctive use of conjunctions, words like "and" or "but."
These were used not to combine phrases, but used in large sentences.
That pattern is the conjoining for sentences and not for smaller things.
The note also contained a distinctive use of adverbs.
Instead of using just one adverb, the writer had a habit of combining them.
This pattern was not found in Michael's known writing So given the situation of how the statistical results turned out, I can conclude that Michael Hunter definitely did not write those suicide notes.
So given the situation of how the statistical results turned out, I can conclude that Michael Hunter definitely did not write those suicide notes.
I can conclude that Michael Hunter definitely did not write those suicide notes.
She then analyzed known writing samples from Joe Mannino.
In the suicide notes, we see more complicated adverbs than simple ones.
And that's the pattern that we find in Joseph Mannino's writing, more complicated adverbs than simple ones.
The suicide notes were not written by Michael Hunter and most likely were written by Joseph Mannino.
I think the family could conclude that not only were-- were the suicide notes phony and concocted, but that the claims within them were also spurious.
Michael's family never believed their son committed suicide.
I knew Michael didn't write the letters.
I knew Michael didn't-- didn't commit suicide.
And so I was very thankful for the, uh, linguistic forensics for proving what I knew all along, that Michael did not write it.
I think the letters were probably one of the first real red lights for me that said, you know, you're-- none of this is making sense anymore.
The theory that Michael Hunter killed himself was further discredited when a blood test revealed he was not HIV positive.
In addition, the amount of lidocaine in Michael's body would have incapacitated him within seconds and would have killed him within two minutes.
This made the possibility of suicide even more unlikely.
This is not a take a handful of pills, lay down on the bed, wait 30 or 45 minutes for an effect type of drug.
This is very rapid onset.
So it would be very unusual for someone to have enough time to clean up, if you will, after this type of injection.
The needle would have remained in his arm.
And if for some reason it didn't, it would have fallen to the floor.
No needle was ever found in Michael Hunter's bedroom.
When confronted with the forensic linguistics, Joe Mannino changed his story.
Joe Mannino changed his story.
He admitted writing the suicide note.
And he also said that Michael had complained of a migraine headache the night before he died.
So he injected him with lidocaine to ease the pain.
Mannino claimed the overdose was an accident.
Joe was very calm.
He would be talking to you and then cry for a second.
And then he'd talk to you again, which is very suspicious to me.
If I was mourning over somebody, I'd be mourning the whole time, not just in spurts.
Now, it would be up to a jury to decide what really happened the night Michael Hunter died.
In 1993, Joe Mannino was charged with first degree murder in the death of his former partner Michael Hunter.
Joe Mannino had everything to live for.
Had a bright future in front of him.
He was a couple of weeks away from graduating from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill with a medical degree.
Um, he was on his way to a residency and just had a very bright future ahead of him.
Prosecutors believed Mannino was a spurned lover in a love triangle And killed Michael Hunter with a lethal injection of lidocaine so he alone would be with Garry Walston.
Mannino claimed Hunter asked him for an injection to help him with this migraine headache and that he accidentally gave him too much lidocaine.
Garry Walston, the former partner of both the victim and the accused, didn't believe it.
Mike had a history of migraines.
And they were pretty bad at times.
And Joe would occasionally offer to give him something that would help him.
And Mike always refused.
There were medical cases where lidocaine had been used in small amounts to treat migraines.
Mannino claimed he only meant to administer enough of the drug to ease his friend's pain.
But prosecutors said Mannino killed Michael Hunter and then concocted the suicide note to make it look like Hunter killed himself.
When that didn't work, Mannino had no choice but to say it was an accident.
He might have been smart as far as his learning was, but people who commit crimes, especially like this, normally don't think ahead.
Prosecutors said Hunter's death was premeditated murder.
They argued that Joe Mannino had planned the killing for weeks.
They said he waited until the third roommate, Garry Walston, was out of town on business.
Then, after Michael Hunter was asleep, snuck into his room and injected him with a lethal concoction of cold medicine and lidocaine.
Joe went in there, filled up a syringe with lidocaine, and very slowly and carefully inserted it into Mike's arm, and he pushed the syringe.
And then he removes the syringe, and before he walked out of the room, Mike was dead.
Investigators naturally asked if Michael would have felt the injection if he was asleep.
It is certainly conceivable that a well-trained hand could place that needle and not awaken you from sleep.
And then slowly administer the drug , and you may never wake up from that.
But was Joe Mannino capable of murder?
It was hard for me to believe that he would have done something like that.
But there were undeniable facts involved.
I mean, Mike was dead.
He was there with him.
He was the only person there with him.
He was the only person with the means.
So there were undeniable facts that pointed to him that I couldn't ignore.
After a three-week trial, Joseph Mannino was convicted of involuntary manslaughter.
Joseph Mannino was convicted of involuntary manslaughter.
He was sentenced to seven years in prison and will never be able to practice medicine.
Some of the jurors believed it was possible that Michael Hunter agreed to the lidocaine injection.
The issue the jury struggled with was, did Mike consent or not?
Joe said he consented.
All of Mike's friends said he didn't.
He would never have.
And of course, Mike couldn't tell us.
I was a little surprised, um, a little angry, you know.
A lot angry.
Um, I mean, because it-- it was like this single act had left a path of destruction a mile wide for so many people's lives, my family, Mike's family, Joe's family.
And I just felt like the punishment didn't fit the crime.
It was over.
Uh, nothing that they could do to Joe would bring Michael back.
And, um, I just-- I just wanted to get on with our lives.
Though questions remain about the verdict, forensic examination of the suicide letter was invaluable.
I think the forensic linguistics helped set the groundwork for proving that Joe was involved in Mike's death and was covering it up.
The linguistics in this case was the first time I've known it's ever been used in any kind of a police investigation to assist in making an arrest.
I've known it's ever been used in any kind of a police investigation to assist in making an arrest.
I think it was a great tool that should be used on a daily basis.
A homemade bomb ripped through a rural home, and investigators had no idea who was responsible.
The device was made with common items found in any store, but a tiny battery number and the label inside a computer uncovered a bizarre tale of revenge.
The tiny town of Fair Haven, Vermont is about as far removed from big city life as any place in the country.
Violence was virtually unheard of, but even so, locals used to joke that Sheila Rockwell and her 17-year-old son, Chris Marquis lived in the safest place in town, about 100 feet away from the police station.
But all of that changed one March afternoon in 1998.
There was a knock on the door.
It was the UPS man.
And he had handed me a package.
Hi, I have a package for delivery.
And I looked at the package, and the package had said, um, Samantha Brown on it.
Well, it didn't ring a bell to me, because I don't know who any Samantha Brown was.
So I brought it into Chris.
You got a package here.
Chris was sitting at his desk in his bedroom, and he didn't know a Samantha Brown, either.
He opened the box.
Inside was a smaller box, wrapped with string.
He cut the string, and there was an explosion.
And I did realize that I was hit, because my fingers were gone.
I tried crawling to Chris because he was moaning.
And that's when I realized that my knee wasn't there and that I couldn't get to him.
Chief Ray Viger heard the explosion and ran over to investigate.
I walked down this little corridor to, uh, into the living room, and then we could see some stuff coming out of the hallway there, and young Chris was laying right there in the hallway, half in the room and half out.
Both Sheila and Chris were rushed to the hospital.
A large piece of the shrapnel, in this case, went towards Christopher Marquis' leg and essentially blew a large hole in his thigh and severed his femoral artery, and he bled to death.
I kept asking, where is Chris?
Where is Chris?
How is Chris doing?
And Dr.Hartman came in, and he put his hand on mine, and he said, "Sheila, Chris didn't make it."
And I can remember just letting out a scream, and then they had, you know, put me under.
The shrapnel found at the bomb scene indicated it was a pipe bomb, the favorite device of amateur bombers.
Tiny brass hex nuts had been wrapped around the bomb to make it even more deadly.
It's a terrible circumstance of violent crime that somebody's just-- hooks up with the wrong person at the wrong time and becomes the victim of this kind of outrageous activity.
The return address on the package said Samantha Brown from Bucyrus, Ohio.
When police checked the name and address, they found both were fictitious.
Chris Marquis was a 17-year-old high school dropout, a loner.
Because of an eye condition, he was slowly going blind.
He spent most of his time indoors, and he had few friends.
Yet, someone clearly wanted to kill him.
As police looked into his background, they found Chris had a secret life-- something his family knew nothing about.
As police combed through the wreckage of Chris Marquis' bedroom, they had one question-- who wanted him dead?
The package were shipped from Ohio and was addressed to the The CB Shack in care of Chris Marquis.
It was a small business Chris ran out of his home, selling Citizens band radios and parts through the internet.
Well, it wasn't really a business.
It was mainly local people.
You know, friends of his that he would fix their radio, or people would hear him on the radio, probably bragging and telling them how he could fix radios, you know.
And it was pretty much the locals.
But investigators soon discovered that Chris Marquis didn't always treat his customers fairly.
I think it's fair to say that Christopher Marquis was not completely honest in all of his business dealings with other people prior to his murder.
Marquis was not completely honest in all of his business dealings with other people prior to his murder.
Chris Marquis made enemies by not living up to the agreements that he had made with individuals on purchasing and selling of CB sets and other various equipment.
Customers told police that Chris would promise to send one model of radio, but after he received payment would ship another lower priced radio.
Obviously a number of these individuals were upset over this, and therefore it was necessary for the investigation to locate and interview these individuals in order to determine if that anger grows to the level where they would do such a violet crime.
With hundreds of customers, investigators now had hundreds of suspects.
Investigators discovered that the packages was shipped by the United Parcel Service from Mansfield, Ohio.
The name and town on the return address were both fictitious.
At the crime scene, investigators sifted through the debris looking for evidence.
An extensive search was required.
We were meticulously going through every room, where any piece of evidence that we're looking for-- a wire, a tool, a hex nut-- we were taking sweepings and going room to room.
Bomb experts say bombs are unique-- that each bomber has a signature style, and the bomb that killed Chris Marquis had a signature all its own.
Chris Marquis had a signature all its own.
One of the things that we knew from the murder scene was that small brass hex nuts had been included in the bomb that killed Chris Marquis.
So the FBI and ATF agents in the search were looking for hex nuts that might be physically consistent with the hex nuts in the bomb.
Investigators also found pieces of Styrofoam used to pack the bomb, a piece of the battery used to detonate it, and they were able to identify the chemical makeup of the gun powder used in the explosion.
But all of these items were available in any hardware store or gun shop.
The bombing death of Chris Marquis made the national news.
The witness realized that he had information that was important to law enforcement.
It was at that point that the cooperating witness contacted law enforcement to relay his information that he had.
The informant told investigators that a long-distance truck driver in Indiana, Christopher Dean, had purchased a CB radio from someone through the internet and was angry about it.
Dean, had purchased a CB radio from someone through the internet and was angry about it.
This witness informed the FBI that he was present in a discussion with Mr. Dean when he spoke of his problems with the sale of a CB radio and a young man in Vermont.
There was information that he'd said he was going to come to Vermont and, you know, beat up Mr. Marquis.
When questioned, Dean confirmed he had purchased a CB radio from Chris Marquis for $400 and had been sent a cheaper model instead.
Mr. Dean was very angered.
At one time, his wife actually called Christopher Marquis and indicated that her husband was quite upset and may be traveling to Vermont, and that, uh, he would not be very happy if he did.
There was a lot of phone calls.
And a lot of times, I would answer the phone, and he asked for my son.
And Chris would say, I'm not here.
You know, he'd give me the motion he didn't want to answer the phone call.
Sheila admitted her son didn't return Dean's money.
But Dean denied sending the bomb.
He had no prior criminal record, and he lived in Indiana.
The package had been shipped from Ohio.
He was described as a very hard working person, reliable, honest-- had a very loving family.
He had plenty of friends and neighbors who trusted him, who thought he was a generous, regular guy.
Investigators wondered whether forensic evidence in Dean's home would contradict his story.
I can't really believe that somebody would do this.
Chris was my pride and joy.
He was my youngest child.
They say that you have to forgive.
And because of my religion, I believe I do have to forgive.
But I don't think I've come to that yet.
Armed with a warrant, investigators searched Christopher Dean's home-- their prime suspect in the bombing death of Chris Marquis.
We are looking everywhere that any place a hex nut could be-- a wooden clothes pin, thumb tacks, batteries, any type of insulating materials-- as well as taking sweepings from carpet, looking for powders-- anything that may have held any type of explosive powders.
In Christopher Dean's basement, they found hex nuts similar to those used in the fatal bond.
To find out if they were the same, analysts used a process known as plasma atomic emission spectroscopy.
They took samples from the hex nuts found with the bomb and those found in Dean's house.
These samples were dissolved in a neutral chemical solution, which was then vaporized at extremely high temperatures.
Different components, like zinc and copper, will vaporize at different speeds, all of which is monitored by a computer.
Investigators concluded the hex nuts had the same chemical make-up.
Identical hex nuts, from a metallurgical point of view, were recovered from Mr. Dean's residence.
They were stored in a container near his workbench, where we alleged the bomb was constructed.
In the rest of the house was even more evidence.
Investigators found the same type of wiring used in the bomb's detonator.
They found the same type of pipe used in the fatal bomb and the same type of Styrofoam packing material was discovered in Dean's garage.
This pipe bomb used smokeless powder.
One of the things we were looking for was powder like that.
Now, interestingly enough, there was no container of powder found.
But in the kitchen, investigators found a small plastic funnel that looked like it might contain a clue.
That funnel-- we could visibly see that there appeared to have been some type of power used in that.
The powder was analyzed using a scanning electron microscope that uses x-rays to reveal its chemical components.
That sample was compared to the powder found at the bomb scene.
Both samples were smokeless gun powder.
And both had a 17% concentration of nitroglycerin, in addition to the stabilizing component, nitrocellulose.
The smokeless power matched the smokeless powder from the murder bomb and from the smokeless powder we found inside his house.
But there was a problem.
All of these items in Dean's home were available at stores at every state in the country.
There was nothing unique or unusual about the gun powder, the pipe, or the hex nuts.
Investigators knew that sometimes the tiniest piece of evidence is the most telling, so they return to the bomb scene.
Among the thousands of pieces of debris, they found a mangled nine volt battery.
With a magnifying glass, investigators saw a series of numbers and letters on the side of the battery-- 3G24G205.
A call to the manufacturer revealed this was a lot number that identified the day and the assembly line on which the battery was assembled.
Inside Christopher Dean's home, investigators found an open pack of the same brand of nine volt batteries with one missing.
The lot numbers on the unused batteries were the same as the one used to detonate the pipe bomb.
And that lot number meant that those batteries were manufactured at the same day on the same line.
Just when prosecutors thought their case against Dean would primarily be circumstantial, a computer forensic expert found even more evidence inside Chris Dean's computer.
It was a file Dean thought he had deleted but hadn't.
Prosecutors found evidence that Christopher Dean ordered a CB radio from Chris Marquis and sent a check for $400.
But Marquis sent a less expensive CB radio than the one Dean ordered.
The motive for Mr. Dean's actions in this murder of Christopher Marquis appears to be, unfortunately, his extreme anger over the fact that Christopher Marquis swindled him out of a $400 CB radio.
There was one last item in Chris Dean's home investigators needed to evaluate-- his computer.
A computer forensic analysis uncovered evidence that Dean had recently downloaded information on how to build a pipe bomb.
If an investigator were looking for evidence of searches for pipe bomb material on the internet, it is not difficult to locate, especially if the computer user himself is not savvy in how to cover his tracks.
And on the hard drive of his computer, there was a copy-- or template-- of the label used on the box that held the pipe bomb, with the same fictitious return address that was found on the pipe bomb package.
Mr. Dean attempted to delete the file, but remnants of the file were still on the computer's hard drive.
He probably thought he covered his tracks and deleted all the files.
However, because he printed it, the computer generated a second file on the system for the printer.
And that is what was found.
It would be remarkable for anybody else to have made up the exact name and exact address that was contained on Christopher Dean's computer.
And I characterized this computer label as a computer fingerprint.
It was conclusive, in my mind, that somebody had-- that this bomb was associated with that house, that somebody had created the address label used in this bomb at the Dean residence.
Christopher Dean was arrested and charged with first-degree murder.
Prosecutors had plenty of evidence to prove Dean chose violence as a way to resolve his dispute with Chris Marquis.
In making the bomb, Dean unwittingly used a nine volt battery which identified the date and the factory in which it was manufactured-- a battery which matched the ones found in his home.
Logs from Mr. Dean's trucking company indicated he was in Mansfield, Ohio on the day the fatal package was sent.
We even went a step further than that.
The witness at the UPS facility in Ohio identified Christopher Dean as the person who shipped that box.
We were able to compare the handwriting on the UPS receipt with Mr. Dean's handwriting.
And handwriting experts would say that it was the same person.
And Dean had no idea he was dealing with a teenager.
They communicated over the internet and a little bit over the telephone, so they'd never met each other.
Mr. Dean didn't know what Mr. Marquis looked like, didn't know he was a 17-year-old boy.
In February of 2000, Christopher Dean pleaded guilty to first degree murder and was sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole.
For Sheila Rockwell, there was little satisfaction in the sentence.
She still bears the scars of the bomb that killed her son.
She limps from the shrapnel that tore through her leg, and her hands will never recover from the blast.
But mostly, she mourns the loss of her 17-year-old son.
Why would anybody ever do this over a CB radio?
You know, if only I had known-- I would try to, you know, reason with Dean.
You know-- pay him for the radio.
Send him back the radio.
Whatever the case may be.
But it was just unbelievable that somebody that crazy would do something like that.
Sitting here today, I still can't fathom how one person would be of a mindset that just because they got ripped off for a couple hundred bucks, that they would want to kill somebody that they've never seen before.
I still can't fathom how one person would be of a mindset that just because they got ripped off for a couple hundred bucks, that they would want to kill somebody that they've never seen before.
For investigators, the case proved something that Christopher Dean never thought possible.
He was convinced that since he'd never been to Vermont, and he had never met Chris Marquis, that no one could tie him to the fatal bomb.
But he never realized forensic science would identify him.
The materials he used to build the bomb, the lot numbers on the batteries, and the fictitious name and address that was recovered from his computer left no doubt that he was the one who killed Chris Marquis.
We had a lot of evidence in this case, but the forensic evidence, to me, was the linchpin of the prosecution, and we not only had one piece of forensic evidence, but we had many, many different kinds of forensic evidence.
It was just amazing, the way that they had pin pointed the paper wrapper, the Styrofoam, the bomb, everything that he had, you know, had put in the bomb-- the hex nuts-- were all right back to the manufacture.
It was unbelievable that science was that good.
It was a drive-by shooting that left one man dead, and another seriously wounded.
A witness said the perpetrator was driving a red Jeep.
There were thousands of vehicles just like it, but it was nothing more than a handful of dirt that made one stand out from all the others.
Front Royal, Virginia is an area steeped in Civil War history, and the nearby Shenandoah River makes this a popular destination for outdoor enthusiasts from hundreds of miles away.
Very laid back community.
It's mainly mountainous, rural.
Hunting and fishing is the main things to do in our area.
On the night of September 26, 2002, there was a terrible rainstorm.
A motorist driving by the Low Water Bridge saw two men on the ground, bleeding, next to a truck.
He immediately called police.
Both men had suffered serious gunshot wounds.
The man on the driver's side of the truck, 20-year-old Joe Kowalewski, was still alive, but just barely.
Kowalewski, was still alive, but just barely.
Yeah, he was dire straights.
Barely clinging to life.
I mean, he was, he was really injured bad.
The other victim, 23-year-old Ty Lathon, was dead.
Lathon was no stranger to law enforcement.
Always been in trouble.
I've actually charged him with robbery before, and flew to Atlanta and picked him up.
Even if he got i trouble, it doesn't make him bad.
To me it doesn't.
Everybody makes mistakes in life.
But Ty was a very loving person, and it's so sad that a young life has been taken.
Police found two empty 12 gauge shotgun shells on the ground nearby, along with three cellular telephones.
Everybody has a cellphone.
But very few people have multiple cell phones.
So therefore, there was possible drug involvement in the aspect of this crime.
Investigators found drug paraphernalia in the victim's car.
And there were circular tire tracks nearby, a possible indication the men had been ambushed.
Since it was a cold, rainy, dark night, we didn't think someone was just down there, enjoying the beauty of the river, and the woods in that area.
The inclement weather made gathering evidence almost impossible.
We had nothing.
We had nothing but a truck, raining, blood all over the place, and a couple shotgun shell casings, and uh, one dead body.
So it was a reality check real quick.
Joe Kowalewski was in a coma for several days.
When he finally regained consciousness, he said very little about the incident, except that the shooter was driving a red Jeep.
I saw it coming around to the right side of my truck, and it fish tail stopped.
I heard two loud bangs.
Sounded like explosions.
He thought it was, it was the police.
He thought it was a flashbang, a distraction device.
I remember falling to the ground, and uh, just immediate numbness and paralyzing feeling, and couldn't breathe.
Investigators hoped that forensic evidence could help find the driver of the mysterious red Jeep.
Investigators found two shotgun shells at the scene of a double shooting that wounded Joe Kowalewski and killed his coworker, Ty Lathon.
Jay Mason, a firearms expert with the Virginia Division of Forensic Science, examined the evidence.
I was asked to make any determination I could as to the number of shots that were fired, and direction and angle which they were fired from.
From the evidence, Mason concluded that at least four shots were fired during the attack.
Mason also wanted to determine how far away the shooter was from his victims.
So he fired the same type of shotgun shells at varying distances to analyze the dispersion of the pellets, then compared them to the shotgun holes in the victims' truck.
There is a rule of thumb that we can use, which states that we expect to find an inch diameter pattern for every three feet or yard of distance after the first yard.
There was a two inch wide pellet pattern on the passenger door of the truck, indicating the killer was between six and nine feet away.
The trajectory revealed the gun was pointed upwards.
This would be consistent with someone firing from a vehicle pulled up alongside the victim's vehicle, and firing from the window of the vehicle.
The ballistic evidence suggested that the skid marks neared the victims' truck were most likely those of the killer.
But analyzing tire impressions was impossible, because the parking area was mostly gravel.
Police also recovered three cellphones at the scene of the murder.
One was Joe Kowalewski's.
The other belonged to the dead victim, Ty Lathon.
Assumption, on our part, was that the one that was found on the ground on the passenger's side possibly could have been the suspect's cellphone, maybe dropped by accident.
Cell phone records revealed that the third phone belonged to Julie Grubbs who was a friend of both victims.
She lived in Annandale, Virginia, about an hour's drive away.
I knew that she was heavily into drugs.
I had heard that she was into different ways of obtaining money, different things.
So I-- my opinion of her was not high at all.
And investigators found something else.
A second cell phone registered to Julie Grubbs was used to call Ty Lathon 22 times in the hours leading up to the shooting.
It doesn't strike you as odd, as the phone calls being made to somebody in Annandale.
What strikes you as odd is the sheer amount of the phone calls, and the time allotment leading up to the murder.
The last call was just minutes before the murder.
When all of a sudden his calls stop at 7:56 PM, then there's obviously some incident that happened at 7:56 p.m. that he did not make any more phone calls.
Investigators were about to interview Julie Grubbs when they developed another lead.
Ty Lathon had told friends that he was involved in drug trafficking with a Sheriff's deputy, Kevin Kinsey, who was a supervisor at the work release center where Lathon was living.
He told me that a cop was letting him deal drugs from the work release.
Excuse my language, but they'd have, uh, prostitutes come up in there.
All kinds of stuff.
We're dealing with like, two investigations at the same time, because Kevin Kinsey did know Tyree Lathon.
And then, now you have the possibility, or the theory, or was Kevin Kinsey involved in the shooting, himself?
With the allegation that a Sheriff's deputy might somehow be involved, the FBI was brought in to assist the investigation.
Although Joe Kowalewski survived the shooting that killed his friend Ty Lathon, Kowalewski wasn't immediately forthcoming in his interviews with police.
Kowalewski wasn't immediately forthcoming in his interviews with police.
Kowalewski was also suspicious of law enforcement, since he knew Ty Lathon was involved in drug trafficking with a Sheriff's deputy.
The killer was still out there on the loose.
I was defenseless in the hospital.
I couldn't get away.
So anybody that walked through that door with a gun, 'cause, uh-- easily could have finished me off.
So, yes I was very scared, nervous, frightened, defenseless.
Kowalewski said he went with Ty to the Low Water Bridge to buy drugs.
Then a red Jeep approached, and someone inside opened fire.
But he never saw the shooter's face.
But the Sheriff's deputy, Kevin Kinsey, didn't own a red Jeep.
Kinsey had been implicated in dealing in illegal drugs with the dead victim, Ty Lathon.
Their other suspect, Julie Grubbs, didn't own a red Jeep, either.
But when police visited Julie Grubbs' apartment, they noticed a red Jeep in the parking lot.
A check of motor vehicles revealed the Jeep belonged to Julie's boyfriend, Lewis Felts.
Felts was allegedly involved in dealing in illegal drugs.
And both knew Ty Lathon and Joe Kowalewski.
The times that I'd seen him, you know, strung out, five day binges of smoking and crack and, um, you know, just sitting there, curled up in a ball, shaking, talking about how much life hurts, literally talking about how much of a rush it would be to kill somebody.
During the surveillance of Felts' red Jeep, investigators saw Felts walk towards his vehicle with some cleaning materials.
If he had been given an opportunity, he could have washed away any blood or DNA evidence that had been transferred from the homicide scene to the Jeep.
And it doesn't take much to wash them things away.
So ultimately, we had to act.
It was-- it was that important, that we could not let him clean that Jeep.
After confiscating the Jeep, investigators searched Julie Grubbs' apartment, and found the cell phone used to call Ty Lathon on the night of the shooting.
Ty Lathon on the night of the shooting.
They also found $1,200 in cash, marijuana, PCP, and crystal methamphetamine.
PCP, and crystal methamphetamine.
But they didn't find the shotgun used in the shooting.
The shotgun would have been the coup de grace, but we didn't have it.
Felts and Grubbs both denied any involvement in the murder.
They claimed they were both in Grubbs' apartment in Annandale, more than 60 miles away from the crime scene.
But investigators noticed something unusual on Felts' Jeep-- a lot of dried mud in the wheel wells.
Here you have a Jeep that supposedly is in Annandale-- you don't have river dirt.
You don't have so much dirt, per se, as you would asphalt, or concrete.
To see if this dirt could link it to the murder scene, investigators contacted forensic geologist Dr. Erich One of the most important things that we do within forensic science is try to solve what we call a forensic triad.
One of the most important things that we do within forensic science is try to solve what we call a forensic triad.
And this is where we link the victim, suspect, and crime scene together.
That triangle, if we can make that work, is crucial to most of our investigations.
Dr. Junger says that mineral ratios, erosion, and other environmental factors can often distinguish one soil sample from another.
That makes everything unique.
So that basically, the idea that the soil is dirt is dirt, no matter where you go, and it doesn't change for miles around-- dirt is different 30 feet apart from each other.
First, soil samples were carefully collected from the Jeep's wheel wells.
Then, they were put through a series of mesh sieves, to separate the coarse materials from the fine.
Under a microscope, Dr. Junger saw a lot of common material, like clay and vegetation.
But he also found something else-- a sparkling blue fragment he identified as azurite and emerald green malachite fragment.
Both were copper-based minerals.
They're not very strong.
And typically, you can take these particles in your fingers are just grind them, and they'll fall apart without much trouble It told me that there had to be a source for these minerals nearby, because these are not going to be transported 20 or 30 miles downstream.
It told me that there had to be a source for these minerals nearby, because these are not going to be transported 20 or 30 miles downstream.
The murder took place at Low Water Bridge, just a few feet away from the Shenandoah River.
Investigators discovered that just one mile upstream was a working quarry.
We've all seen people who've worn copper bracelets for long periods of time, and then it turns their skin green underneath.
The same effect is happening.
This is what's happening in the water there.
And once I'd seen that, I knew we had found the source of the malachite and the azurite.
Soil samples were collected from the murder scene in the area where police noticed the circular tire tracks next to Low Water Bridge.
If we think the suspect came in one direction, left in a different way, we take samples all along those tracks, because again, those soils will change.
The samples from the parking area were analyzed in the same way as the soil samples from Lewis Felts' Jeep.
In both samples were the same mineral components of azurite and malachite.
Mr. Felts' vehicle was at that crime scene when the murder took place.
No question, ifs, ands, buts about it.
Not 100 yards up the road, not 100 yards down the road, down the whatever.
It puts his vehicle right there.
Dr. Junger believes the minerals from the quarry got into the Shenandoah River, traveled a mile downstream, and were washed ashore into the parking lot at Low Water Bridge around the time of the murder.
He's the man.
You know, he's, he's the know all, tell all god of this, of forensic geology.
Now investigators had to prove who was in the Jeep on the night of the murder.
We were in the position of being able to convict the vehicle of the homicide, but we were much weaker on proving who actually pulled the trigger.
Julie Grubbs and her boyfriend, Lewis Felts, emerged as the prime suspects in the double shooting at Low Water Bridge.
Lewis Felts, emerged as the prime suspects in the double shooting at Low Water Bridge.
Witnesses placed Julie Grubbs at her apartment around the time of the murder, but someone using her cell phone and called Ty Lathon 22 times in the hours leading up to the murder.
Every time you push that send button, you're hitting a tower, and that information's being logged in and kept.
A check of cell tower records showed that Julie Grubbs' cell phone used many different cell towers during those calls.
The cell phone started making phone calls at 3:33 PM on the 26th, the day of the murder.
And they were using Washington, DC, cell site towers.
Around between the 6 to 7 o'clock hour, they roll over into Fredericksburg towers, and then ultimately in the Winchester towers, which is straight down from Fairfax.
So we're actually able to show that that cellphone traveled west on 50, and ended up in the Shenandoah Valley that night, and was used.
And investigators discovered that several local residents saw Lewis Felts in a nearby convenience store earlier that day.
In addition, Ty Lathon's stepmother was with Ty about two hours before the murder, when he received a cell phone call.
And he said, Lewis, damn it, I told you I'll meet you at Deer Lake, and slammed the phone down.
I told you I'll meet you at Deer Lake, and slammed the phone down.
Felts consistently denied being in Warren County for a number of years prior to the murder.
And so it was vital to our case to be able to put him here in Warren County, and put him near the crime scene.
And we were able to do that through the cell phone records.
And investigators discovered even more forensic evidence.
Mike Kennedy, a friend of Lewis Felts, came forward with a startling revelation that he had sold Felts a shotgun three weeks before the murder.
Kennedy also said he had several spent shells from that shotgun still in his possession.
They might never believe me or whatever, but I told them that I fired the gun.
They wanted to know where.
Investigators recovered nine shell casings in Kennedy's yard.
When a shotgun fires, the firing pin leaves a distinctive mark on the shell.
I like to refer to it as a fingerprint of the firearm, this impression on back of a shot shell case.
Firearms expert Jay Mason compared the shell casings from Michael Kennedy to the shells found at the crime scene.
He saw double horizontal lines with a slash on all of the samples.
The fact that I was able to identify the shot shell cases all having been fired from the same firearm put the-- the murder weapon in the hands of the suspect.
Kennedy wasn't surprised by the match.
The day after Ty was murdered, I knew in my head Lewis Felts has something to do with it.
Lewis Felts has something to do with it.
Prosecutors believed the motive for the shooting may have been old-fashion jealousy.
The classic love triangle.
There's some evidence that there was jealousy that had developed by Felts.
He was suspicious that Ty had been with his girlfriend.
The forensic evidence shows that Lewis Felts called Ty Lathon while driving towards Front Royal and asked him to meet at Low Water bridge.
Ty Lathon while driving towards Front Royal and asked him to meet at Low Water bridge.
There, he saw Ty Lathon and Joe Kowalewski parked and waiting.
Felts fired into the truck, killing Ty Lathon and wounding Kowalewski.
The trajectory analysis shows that Felts fired from his Jeep.
Two shell casings fell to the ground.
As Felts drove away, the minerals malachite and azurite lodged in his wheel wells, giving investigators a precise geological record of his location.
When Felts saw the amount of forensic evidence against him, he accepted a plea bargain, and pled guilty to one count of capital murder, and one count of attempted murder.
Felts was sentenced to 25 years in prison.
I think our case showed that Lewis Felts is a heartless killer, and deserved every minute behind bars that he received.
Prosecutors say there is no evidence to suggest that Julie Grubbs was involved in the shooting.
Joe Kowalewski is blind in his right eye, and has limited use of his right arm.
Kevin Kinsey, the Sheriff's deputy implicated in drug dealing, was later convicted of distribution of crack cocaine, and sentenced to 40 months in prison.
There was no evidence he was involved in Lathon's murder.
Let me tell you something.
I'll be the first man if Kinsey had anything to do with the death of Tyree Lathon.
He'd be in jail for it right this second.
I can guarantee you that.
The science and technology really came into play in this case in a tremendous way.
We couldn't have completed this prosecution without it.
Your witnesses will change their story.
Your victims will change story.
Uh, there's just too many other, um, things that can change.
But your physical evidence never changes, period.
It never changes.
And to me, that's one of the key things.
Physical evidence tells it like it is.
And I knew that they can do it.
A teenage girl in Australia was found dead on the side of a road.
Her boyfriend became the prime suspect.
Eventually, he confessed to her murder.
But so did another man.
Who was telling the truth?
It took 40 years, a writer, and a pedestrian crash reconstructionist to finally uncover the truth.
The city of Perth sits on the Western Coast of the vast continent of Australia.
It's a modern example of the industrious, but laid back Aussie lifestyle, where beaches, barbecuing, and sport are critically important.
In 1963, the city was smaller, but not that different.
Perth had been a sleepy little hollow.
Just a beautiful little town, where you had never thought of any sort of crime or murder, very innocent, very secure.
At that time, John Button was a teenager in love with 17-year-old Rosemary Anderson.
Very quiet, a bit head strong at times.
But very enjoyable, company-wise.
On John's 19th birthday, Rosemary stopped over at John's house to celebrate.
Rosemary stopped over at John's house to celebrate.
John's little brother was also there.
The three teens spent the night watching television.
While they were eating the fish and chips, John, watching TV, saw her hand come across for his piece of fish. -Get your bloody hands off it!
John, watching TV, saw her hand come across for his piece of fish. -Get your bloody hands off it!
Yelled at the person, thinking it was his little brother, but it was Rosemary.
You know, you're a real jerk sometimes.
She got upset.
She stormed off and said, that was over.
She was walking home.
Button said he got into his car and drove alongside her, apologizing, and trying to convince her to get into the car so he could drive her home.
She had done that once before.
And after-- I'll take you home.
I'll take you home.
And after a five minute walk on her own, she cooled down.
He thought she would do that again.
So he watched as Rosemary walked under a railway overpass and around the corner.
I sat there.
I smoked a cigarette.
And just in those two or three minutes, she was out of sight.
John claimed he drove after Rosemary and found her face down on the side of the road, unconscious, bruised, and bleeding.
So without thinking, I just put her straight in the car and rushed her straight off to her family doctor.
I just put her straight in the car and rushed her straight off to her family doctor.
Dr. Alister Turner treated Rosemary that night.
She had severe injuries, where she was scraped on the road, to her face and to her limbs.
And her blood pressure was very unstable, going up and down as she was losing blood into her abdominal organs and so on.
So really, I don't think she ever had any chance of survival.
When the police arrived, they noticed a dent on the front of John's car.
And they also noticed fresh blood.
John was interrogated for several hours.
There was the accusations.
Why did you knock her down?
We know it was you that knocked her down.
Of course it was you. Look at the front of the car.
It's damaged. You had an argument.
It must have been you.
Eventually, Button confessed to hitting his girlfriend with his car.
In his written confession, he admitted the couple's argument was over something more than a piece of fish.
They wrote down that I tried to get fresh with Rosemary.
That I tried to-- tried to come on to her, and she had refused my advances.
And that that's what caused the argument.
When Rosemary refused to get in the car, Button said, he got angry and tried to scare her.
Button said, he got angry and tried to scare her.
So he sped towards her intending to stop, but lost control of the car, and inadvertently hit her.
Prosecutors had all they needed for a conviction.
Just a few hours after he confessed to killing his girlfriend with this car, John Button recanted.
He now said his confession was coerced, and that police hit him during the interrogation.
And I think it was after that four hours of questioning that I received a quick punch to the stomach, which put me underneath the table.
They pulled me out and set me back in the chair again.
And I realized, at that point, that they weren't going to let me out of here until they got a confession.
And the way they were going, it was just going to get more and more physical.
Button said the body damage on his car happened a few weeks earlier, and that Rosemary's blood dripped onto the front bumper when he picked her up to take her to the hospital.
Trevor Condren examined the car at the request of the local police.
If this car had struck a pedestrian, I would have expected to find damage to the bonnet, like such as dented bonnet, drag marks, scrape marks.
I would have expected to find damage to the bonnet, like such as dented bonnet, drag marks, scrape marks.
But John Button went on trial for murder.
And his earlier confession made it an open and shut case.
The jury deliberated for six hours before returning to the courtroom with their verdict.
Members of the jury, how do you find the accused?
Guilty or not guilty?
Not guilty, Your Honor.
I'm thinking, I'm going home.
Could I go now?
Go could I run for the door?
And I decided, well, I better not.
I've got to wait until the judge tells me I can go.
So I turned back to the judge.
Terribly sorry, Your Honor.
I made a mistake.
We find him guilty.
The judge had to say, guilty of what?
Guilty of manslaughter.
A manslaughter verdict meant John Button's life had been spared.
John Button's life had been spared.
But he was sentenced to 10 years of hard labor in Fremantle Prison.
The police succeeded in the jury thinking he was a terrible young man trying to have sex with that beautiful young girl.
I've heard that that's what the foreman of jury said.
Why do I sign that confession?
Why did they force me into it?
Why did we have that argument with my girlfriend?
Fremantle Prison was a relic from Victorian times, with no plumbing, heating, or air conditioning.
You're locked up in a cell with nothing but a mattress on the floor, a rubber bucket in the corner, a plastic plate, and a wooden spoon.
A very simple little argument over just a small bit of fish.
That's all-- all that it-- it started with.
Seven months later, another man arrived at Fremantle Prison to await his execution.
Eric Edgar Cooke had been convicted of killing a young man in cold blood.
He had also confessed to other acts of random violence.
Well, Cooke confessed to 8 murders, and about 12 home invasion, in which women were attacked in their beds.
But that wasn't all.
Incredibly, Cooke also said that he was the one who killed Rosemary Anderson.
Cooke said, he intentionally ran her down when she was walking on the side of road.
For John Button, it was an answer to his prayers.
I said, as my lawyer came in and told me of this confession, I believed then, well, this is it.
I'm free.
It's only a matter of time.
And for the first time, Button recalled seeing Cooke's car pass him when he was looking for Rosemary that night.
Button recalled seeing Cooke's car pass him when he was looking for Rosemary that night.
What I didn't realize, at that they moment, as it's turned out, driving passed, on the other side of the railway embutment, that man was Eric Cooke.
But there were problems with Cooke's confession.
Police took Cooke to the scene of Rosemary Anderson's murder, and asked him to identify where the incident took place.
Cooke pointed to the wrong spot.
Police didn't believe Cooke's story.
So the court denied John Button's appeal.
What should have happened is that the Court of Criminal Appeals should have awarded a retrial of John Button, at which, Eric Cooke would be the start witness.
Appeals should have awarded a retrial of John Button, at which, Eric Cooke would be the start witness.
Button clung to hope.
Until the day it disappeared, along with the birds gathered on the roof of the prison gallows.
They, all of a sudden, just fly off into the air as the trap door is released.
And you know, just by that, that a person's been hanged.
Eric Edgar Cooke was executed.
I knew that once Eric was hanged, that was the end of any other chance I had of being released.
The minister attending Cooke's execution said Cooke took the Bible from his hands and, again, confessed to Rosemary's murder.
But it was of no help to John Button.
It would take years before he would get another chance to prove his innocence.
After serving 5 years of a 10 year sentence, John Button was released from prison for good behavior.
John Button was released from prison for good behavior.
The first thing he did was visit Rosemary Anderson's grave.
He was out of prison, physically, but not out of prison emotionally.
He led his life with a big sign over his head, convicted killer.
And a big rock in is hard, injustice.
Button eventually got married, had two children, found a job, and battled a serious depression.
I desperately wanted to live.
But the heartache and the pain of living with the injustice was so intense that I knew that I just wasn't going to make it.
That I would finish up doing something foolish.
It was seven years, um, after I was released, I did do something foolish.
I did do something foolish.
In desperation, Button took an overdose of sleeping pills, got into his car, and drove off a steep embankment at 100 miles an hour.
Miraculously, he survived.
And from that point on, my life changed completely.
And a couple things that I asked of this God that had watched over me, was, would he-- would he-- would he give me back the life?
And would he give me justice in my lifetime?
He wrote to government officials looking for a way to clear his name, with no luck.
Even tried writing a book, but no publisher would touch it.
And I remember standing there with the rejection slip in my hand.
And I raised my hands up and I said, God, if you want this book written, you better do something-- and the phone rang.
God, if you want this book written, you better do something-- and the phone rang.
It was my brother ringing me up, to-- just to mention that he had been out dancing with a young lady last night.
And he told her about the injustice.
And she wanted to meet me.
The call was about Estelle Blackburn, a journalist and a former government press secretary.
She was intrigued by the case.
And agreed to help investigate Button's story.
I had the skills.
And the doors that were slammed shut in his face opened for me.
I had the networks and the contacts.
I could get the files and everything that he needed.
I knew how to research. I was playing a detective.
I was investigating a 30-year-old murder, trying to find fresh evidence.
Blackburn wasn't entirely convinced that Button was innocent.
She had serious doubts about Eric Cooke's credibility.
Now, I lived through the Cooke era.
I knew Cooke didn't run down girls.
Cooke shot people.
And later, we learned that he stabbed and strangled, as well.
But he certainly didn't run down girls.
But in the files of Button's 1964 appeal, Estelle found something surprising.
Estelle found something surprising.
Something that h had not been widely reported 30 years earlier.
Six women had survived hit and run car crashes.
And Eric Cooke had confessed to being the driver in each of them.
Each woman's story was eerily similar to Rosemary's.
Young women on the dark isolated roads run down by a stolen car.
Estelle eventually wrote her own book about John Button's case.
And she, too, had problems finding a publisher.
That is, until she asked her friend, a local newspaper publisher for help.
When Bret Christian read the manuscript, he agreed to personally finance the publication of Blackburn's book.
Having met John, I realized it was just not possible for him to have done it.
And it didn't seem-- the physics didn't seem right to me, Christian also questioned the lack of damage to the front of Button's car.
Christian also questioned the lack of damage to the front of Button's car.
The police were trying to say that John's little lightweight French Simca had hit a girl hard enough to kill her, and yet, there was only-- there was really no discernible damage on it.
It didn't add up, simply didn't add up.
But could science back up his suspicions?
The answer to that question would come from the world's smartest crash test dummy.
Estelle Blackburn's book convinced many that John Button was innocent, and that serial killer Eric Cooke was the one who killed Rosemary Anderson.
Cooke was the one who killed Rosemary Anderson.
Without a legal verdict, I still was classed as a killer, a convicted killer.
His only hope of overturning the verdict was to find new or fresh evidence in this 37-year-old case.
Fresh evidence at law in this jurisdiction, is evidence which was not available at the time of the trial, which, obviously, didn't feature at the time of the trial.
And which could not, with reasonable diligence, have been available at the trial.
Publisher Bret Christian believed so strongly in Button's innocence that he searched all over the world for an expert in the new field of forensics called Pedestrian Crash Reconstruction.
In Texas, he found Rusty Haight, a former policeman and one of the most respected crash reconstructionists in the field.
Accident reconstruction is an effort to explain how a crash, a car crash, happened.
We use a lot of common sense, some elementary applied physics, and more common sense, and try to piece together the objective information we have for a given car crash to make some sense of it, to sort out how things happened.
When Haight first looked at photographs taken of John Button's car after the accident, he didn't believe there was damage consistent with the fatal collision.
Rosemary Anderson, the girl that was hit by a car, was hit me in the range of 30 to 40 miles an hour.
And that leaves, you know, that kind of contact with the body leaves distinctive marks on a car.
There were none of those marks on the car that I saw photos of.
Nothing even close.
The mark would be on the hood, because of the way a body moves when hit at that speed.
And I think you can envision a person, as they're struck by a car, basically, wrapping or bending onto the front of the car.
The technical term we use when we were describing the trajectory is a wrapped trajectory, where the force applied on the body is below the body's center of mass.
And so the body's going to bend, usually about the waist, and that's going to leave some sort of mark on the hood.
But in an appeals court, Haight would need more than just an opinion.
Haight would need more than just an opinion.
He would need hard, forensic proof.
For that, he needed to perform pedestrian crash tests on a 1963 Simca brand car, a model, that by this time, was 35 years old.
Despite the age, Bret Christian found three usable cars.
He also found a 1963 Holden, the model Eric Cooke said he was driving when he killed Rosemary Anderson.
Cooke's version is that he drives up behind her and hits her from behind.
A biomedical dummy was used to mimic the reactions of Rosemary's body.
Haight suspended it by a fishing line that breaks on impact.
The police didn't accept Eric Cooke version of the crash, because the exterior sun visor on his car wasn't damaged, as one would expect.
When Haight's test car struck the dummy from behind, it rolled onto the hood and over the roof, just as Eric Cooke had claimed.
But I was focused on the visor.
I was focused on the alignment.
And then I looked at the visor, and I remember seeing the visor bend when the dummy hit it.
And it sent a cold chill up my back.
I thought, ah, no. This is not good.
It can't be good.
But the visor had snapped back into shape with no damage.
This explained why Eric Cooke's visor showed no damage when police inspected it.
They actually flex.
That's what this visor had done when the body hit it.
So now, all of a sudden, what was kind of a tense moment became, hey!
We've done it.
So the dummy did exactly what Cooke said.
It was just a moment of, wow! This is it!
We've done it.
And the dummy landed face down, consistent with how John Button found Rosemary's body.
But the tests on John Button's car, the Simca were even more persuasive.
We found marking at the leading edge of the hood.
And more important, we found a big dent, a big depression in the hood, where the dummy had come down and basically smacked it's head on the hood.
Whether we hit in the right, more in the center, or on the left, it just didn't matter.
There was no similar damage to Button's car.
And each time, the dummy landed on its back, inconsistent with the injuries on the front of Rosemary's body.
Rusty Haight concluded that John Button did not kill Rosemary Anderson.
So with Estelle's research, and with Haight's evidence, we were able to show both of those things.
A, it must have been Cooke.
And B, it could not have been Button.
You can't get a much stronger case than that.
This was enough to convince three judges on the Supreme Court of West Australia.
That the verdict must be regarded as unsafe and unsatisfactory on the ground that there has been a miscarriage of justice.
We went back and corrected a wrong.
And we did it with an appropriate use of the forensic evidence.
But also, a liberal use of good investigative techniques that didn't come from the police.
That came from, basically, lay people.
I think it makes us all a little bit more aware of the fallibility of the system, and have a little bit more faith that it can be rectified.
And that it is possible.
It's the advance of science that's only just been made possible.
And the recognition of that branch of science, that is motor vehicle crash reconstruction, that I would say, beyond any doubt, put the seal of success on John Button's case.
It was supposed to be a routine motorcade for the Queen of England.
But along this two lane highway leading to Yosemite National Park, a car carrying Secret Service agents collided with another, killing three people.
Park, a car carrying Secret Service agents collided with another, killing three people.
What went wrong?
Who was responsible?
Hidden, in this photograph, was the clue to the mystery.
In 1983, Yosemite National Park in California was selected to be the site of a royal visit, by the heads of the British monarchy.
Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip were scheduled to tour the park, following a visit with President Reagan at his California home.
Don Schneider, a photographer and reporter for a local radio station, monitored the preparations for her arrival on a shortwave radio.
In advance of that, there were three car loads of Secret Service agents that were going to Yosemite to provide security at that location for her.
They were not directly involved in her transport, but were supposed to be preceding her and have things ready up there in the park.
Four cars, carrying Secret Service agents, traveled along Highway 132, a two-lane road that snaked its way through the foothills of the Sierra Nevada.
There were three agents in the second car.
The driver was George LeBarge.
41 years old, he was married with a young son.
George LeBarge was a 14 year veteran of the Secret Service from Dayton, Ohio.
He had been, for many years, assigned to the protection detail of the Vice President.
As the three agents made their way eastward toward Yosemite, Deputy Sheriff Ron Sinclair, of the Mariposa County Sheriff's Office, was preparing to check the road closings for the Queen's visit.
County Sheriff's Office, was preparing to check the road closings for the Queen's visit.
Rod was a big man, heavy, and was quite macho and authoritative.
We had heard-- but we never produced any hard evidence of this fact-- that Sinclair was something of a loose cannon.
Sinclair, and another deputy, climbed into a Chevy Impala patrol car similar to this one, and sped west on Highway 132, to check on the road closings.
At the same moment, the Secret Service agents continued eastward in a small rental car.
None of the agents was wearing a seat belt, and the road was wet from a light rain.
Both Sinclair and the convoy of Secret Service agents believe the road had been cleared of traffic.
The sheriff's car was coming from our right, around this curve.
The Secret Service cars were coming from our left.
The road curved around a small hill that blocked the driver's view of approaching cars.
That location had been the scene of seven accidents in the previous three years.
At 10:31 AM on March 5, it happened again.
The two cars entered the curve at the exact same moment.
The three agents were killed instantly.
Protected by seat belts, the two deputies suffered only minor injuries.
It appeared to be a terrible, but unavoidable, tragedy.
But was it?
The answer lay in the scarred surface of the roadway, and twisted metal of the wrecked cars.
A car with three Secret Service agents, and a Sheriff's patrol car with two deputies, collided along the back road near Yosemite National Park.
The collision demolished both cars and claimed the lives of three Secret Service agents.
The question facing investigators was why?
Within two hours, a special unit of the Fresno, California Highway Patrol called the Multidisciplinary Accident Investigation Team, or MAIT, arrived at the scene.
California Highway Patrol called the Multidisciplinary Accident Investigation Team, or MAIT, arrived at the scene.
Accident Investigation Team, or MAIT, arrived at the scene.
Their job is to take a look at everything that's there, document it, classify it, photograph it, and then use it later in the reconstruction process, to develop a model as to how the vehicles were moving.
You want to know what the damage patterns are.
Where's the contact damage?
Where's the induced damage?
What is the nature of the damage?
How does that relate to objects or other vehicles?
Are there people or anything else the vehicle may have come in contact with?
The investigators found the point of impact marked by scattered debris, a pool of brake fluid, and more than a dozen gouge and scrape marks.
They also found a set of skid marks, 64 feet long.
They began in Sgt. Sinclair's lane, crossed the yellow center lines, and ended in the oncoming lane traveled by the Secret Service.
It was clear the skid marks would be a critical clue.
They photographed the roadway in detail.
That was their first job, and they needed to do that before it was lost, before the roadway could be opened.
The MAIT investigators then interviewed eyewitnesses, one of whom was driving behind the Secret Service cars.
According to her, the agents did nothing wrong.
They were relaxed, taking their time, driving along at a reasonable speed for the area and the terrain.
After gathering all the evidence, the MAIT investigators began the hard work of reconstructing what caused the accident.
What I'm doing here is called motion analysis.
I'm using the scale physical evidence, and the scale vehicles, to try to determine how the vehicles were moving during particular phases of the collision.
The motion analysis provided the data for a series of critical calculations.
The first was the momentum of each car immediately after the collision.
Momentum is determined by multiplying each car's speed by its weight.
According to the laws of physics, when objects collide, as in this demonstration, their momentum after the impact is equal to that before.
If the investigators could figure out the speed of the two cars as they separated immediately after impact, they could calculate how fast they were going before the crash.
The investigators knew the weights of both cars.
By measuring the distance and direction they had slid, their rotation, and the amount of friction, they were able to calculate their post impact speeds.
30 miles per hour for the Sheriff's car.
24 miles per hour for the Secret Service.
Next they looked at the angle at which the two cars had collided.
The angle of impact, in this particular collision evaluation, was critical to determining how this collision took place.
MAIT calculated that the two cars collided at a 10 degree angle, almost directly head on.
They already knew the direction the Sheriff was traveling from the skid marks, so the angle of impact allowed them to calculate the path of the Secret Service car.
10 degree approach angle between these two vehicles places the Secret Service Dodge Aries within its lane of travel, and moving slightly from left to right as a potential evasive tactic as impact takes place.
Eyewitness testimony had already established that the Secret Service agents were driving at around 35 miles per hour.
The critical question was, how fast was Deputy Sinclair driving?
Sinclair claimed he was going 55 or 60 miles per hour.
Applying the laws of conservation of momentum, MAIT calculated he was actually doing 76 miles per hour.
MAIT calculated he was actually doing 76 miles per hour.
When he came into that curve, his vehicle was out of position for the speed that he was traveling.
When he saw traffic coming at him in the eastbound direction, he simply didn't have enough distance or enough time to safely negotiate the curve.
He panicked, locked up the brakes on the patrol car.
Once he did that, the patrol car slides straight across the inside of the curve, into the opposing traffic lane, and struck the second Secret Service vehicle.
Based on its three week investigation, the California Highway Patrol believed that Sergeant Sinclair was grossly negligent, and recommended that he be criminally prosecuted.
I believe the facts were there, given the circumstances, that you could make a case for misdemeanor manslaughter.
But one man had lingering doubts about the investigation.
Attorney Charles Brunn, who represented Rod Sinclair, believed something vital might have been missed.
Rod kept saying, over and over again, "They were in my lane of travel, they were heading right at me.
Was deputy Sinclair telling the truth?
Brunn hired his own investigators to find out, and what they would discover would force the highway patrol to reopen their investigation.
Three Secret Service agents had been killed in a near head on collision with the Sheriff's patrol car.
All the evidence indicated that Deputy Sheriff Rod Sinclair was solely to blame.
Sinclair was solely to blame.
But then, a local photographer, Don Schneider, was looking at slides of the accident when he discovered a clue the highway patrol had missed.
Another skid mark.
It was a surprise to me to see the mark there, because I had not observed the skid mark at the accident site.
And I asked the question of the group that was there, hey fellows, what is this?
And pointed to the skid mark that I saw on the screen.
And it was obvious, in the matter the discussion a few moments later, that had something to do with the Secret Service car.
Attorney Charles Brunn showed the faint skid mark to a team of accident reconstruction experts.
From the angle of the mark, it appeared that the Secret Service car had been over the center line, and was turning back into its own lane when it was hit.
And all of a sudden, I thought to myself, we have cause here for optimism.
Sergeant Sinclair, it would seem, was vindicated.
He said they were coming right at him.
The new evidence suggested Sinclair had hit the brakes.
Sinclair had hit the brakes.
Not because he was going too fast, as the highway patrol contended, but because he saw danger ahead.
The California Highway Patrol investigators dismissed the new evidence, calling it the phantom skid mark.
The CHP experts covered that ground on their hands and knees, literally inch by inch, and never saw that skid mark.
Why they didn't find it wasn't clear.
But the discovery gave new impetus to Brunn's team of forensic accident reconstruction experts.
Paul Kayfetz, a photographer and engineer, is an expert in something called photogrammetry.
It's a $6 word for making measurements from photographs, or using photographs to make measurements.
Brunn's experts needed a map of the accident scene with the skid marks to conduct their investigation.
Kayfetz's job was to reproduce the mark on the road, in its exact position, so that a surveyor could map its location.
He began by making a 35 millimeter negative of Schneider's photograph showing the skid mark.
I put it into a special camera that I take back to the scene.
I locate the exact point from which he took his photograph, and then looking through my camera, I can remark the position of the skid mark on the ground, and have a surveyor record it.
I can remark the position of the skid mark on the ground, and have a surveyor record it.
The chalk marks help Kayfetz verify that the mark he recreated was exactly as it appeared in the photo.
Once the new survey map was created, Doctor William Blythe, an expert in applied mechanics and accident reconstruction, was able to trace the path of the Secret Service car.
Doctor William Blythe, an expert in applied mechanics and accident reconstruction, was able to trace the path of the Secret Service car.
The results confirmed Sinclair's statement that the Secret Service cars were over the center line.
I think that the amount of the vehicle over the center line, as I recall, was something in the neighborhood of one third or one half of the vehicle.
It wasn't fully in the oncoming lane.
The highway patrol had determined that the collision was virtually head on.
Blythe showed that the Sheriff's car had struck at an angle, as if Agent LeBarge had been turning to the right to get back into his own lane.
Doctor Blythe determined that the critical skid mark was made by one of the front tires on the agents' car.
It did have dark edges to it, which is indicative of a front tire.
When you apply your brakes, the weight of the car shifts to the front axle.
And when that happens, the front tires to cup a little bit, and the load is on the edges of the tires, on the side walls of the tires, primarily.
The critical question was, which front tire?
The highway patrol experts, after first denying the existence of the skid mark, argued it was made by the left.
If they were correct, it meant the Secret Service could not have been over the center line.
Using photogrammetry, Kayfetz was able to determine the width of the tire that made the skid mark, and prove that it was, in fact, the right tire.
As it happened, the right front tire on the wrecked LeBarge car was almost an inch narrower than the other three tires.
It had been replaced, probably, by a spare tire at some point.
And that particular tire mark matched only that narrower right front tire.
Proving the skid mark belonged to the Secret Service car was one of two critical issues facing Doctor Blythe.
What was the Sheriff reacting to when he applied his brakes?
Was he reacting to his perception that he was going too fast to make the corner?
Was he reacting to some other danger that he saw?
The highway patrol found Sinclair was going too fast, but Doctor Blythe ran his own test, using a patrol car identical to the one Sinclair was driving.
The range for the Sheriff's vehicle that I found was between 62 to 66 miles an hour.
At that speed, Sergeant Sinclair had no reason to hit his brakes, because he could have comfortably negotiated the curve.
That left only one explanation.
We felt there was negligence on the part of the drivers of the first two cars in that entourage, in that they crossed the center line.
Okay, let's begin a test run.
To help prove these findings, Brunn asked Paul Kayfetz to conduct a visibility study, like this one, recreating what each driver saw an instant before the collision.
Brunn asked Paul Kayfetz to conduct a visibility study, like this one, recreating what each driver saw an instant before the collision.
The results would reveal another surprising piece of evidence.
A high speed collision.
Three Secret Service agents killed.
California Highway Patrol investigators determined that Sheriff's deputy, Rod Sinclair, was solely responsible.
But then the discovery of a skid mark in this photograph suggested the Secret Service was also at fault.
The problem was proving it.
To reconstruct the critical moments before Deputy Sinclair slammed on his brakes, attorney Brunn asked Paul Kayfetz to conduct a visibility study.
What we were trying to find out is, did that skid, and ultimate loss of control, start because he perceived that the oncoming lead car was in his lane?
Kayfetz mounted cameras in vehicles identical to those involved in the accident, positioning them to record each driver's point of view.
Then, based on the physical evidence and the calculations of Doctor Blythe, he reconstructed the events that preceded the fatal collision.
From this viewpoint, you can actually see that the lead car is halfway over the center line, and the LeBarge car in front of this car is also a couple of feet over the center line.
Now comes the view from the fourth car, driven by a key eyewitness, Mona Crocker, who told MAIT investigators she had seen the accident happen.
She testified that at no time did she see any of the three Secret Service cars cross the center line.
She also testified that she saw the accident occur.
Kayfetz's reenactment told a different story.
So this is Mona Crocker's viewpoint.
And what's important here is that, although the lead car ahead of her goes halfway over the center line, straddles the center line, from her viewpoint that is never visible, because it's around the curve and over the hill.
Crocker thought she could see the position of the cars.
In fact, she could not.
I was actually surprised at the result about what Mona Crocker could or couldn't see.
Crocker could or couldn't see.
I hadn't the predicted or expected that.
From the beginning, the critical question in the case was always, why did Deputy Sinclair jam on his brakes?
Sinclair jam on his brakes?
Kayfetz's dramatic reenactment answered the question.
From Sinclair's viewpoint, we can see that he sees the lead Secret Service car straddling the center line, just a bit more than a second before he begins to skid in a straight line across the highway.
The last view is that of Agent LeBarge just before the fatal crash.
Based on Kayfetz's powerful reenactment, and the work of Brunn's team of investigators, a judge ruled that the Secret Service agents were partially responsible for the accident.
He also ruled that the United States should reimburse Mariposa County 30% of a $4 million settlement that had been paid to the families of the Secret Service agents killed in the accident.
Mariposa County 30% of a $4 million settlement that had been paid to the families of the Secret Service agents killed in the accident.
I felt good that the judge believed Sgt. Sinclair, that the Secret Service agents had driven across the center line.
I felt very good about that.
The verdict was later overturned on a technicality, but Brunn and his team of forensic experts had proven their case.
It is phenomenal, it is amazing, what they can put together, and how they can reconstruct an accident.
And how they can make those small pieces of evidence tell a story.
There's satisfaction when the pieces come together in a case like this, and other similar cases.
That was a very powerful presentation, and I recall having a lump in my throat when I watched it.
It was as if you were in the driver's seat, watching your life come to an end in that split second.
It was a very powerful videotape.
In 1993 the Amtrak railroad experienced the deadliest train crash in the United States history.
47 passengers and crew were killed.
103 more were injured.
The cause of the accident was unclear.
The clues to this mystery were etched in twisted steel, and burried in the mud of an Alabama bayou waiting for investigators to find them.
Amtrak Sunset Limited is the country's only remaining transcontinental train.
Sunset Limited has an interesting history, kind of dates back to the romantic time of train travel, when it was very elegant and posh to travel by train.
On September 20, 1993 Trudy Justin and her husband, Larry, boarded the Sunset Limited in Deming, New Mexico headed for Florida.
Larry, boarded the Sunset Limited in Deming, New Mexico headed for Florida.
New Mexico headed for Florida.
And I could sit there, and look, and talk to other people.
But the best part is going to the dining car.
We went to the dining car three times a day.
And you'd just trot back over, and they were really nice to you.
After dinner, Trudy and Larry returned to their seats to rest.
The train stopped briefly in New Orleans to fix a broken air conditioner.
By 2:30 a.m. it was running about 33 minutes behind schedule.
33 minutes behind schedule.
It stopped in Mobile, Alabama, where the engineer waited until a freight train cleared the bridge up ahead.
Then the Sunset Limited started on the last leg of it's trip, 750 miles to Miami.
The train throttled up to a cruising speed of 72 miles an hour, but visability was hindered by fog.
Shortly before three AM, the Sunset Limited approached the Bayou Canot bridge.
The engine's fuel tanks ruptured, igniting the diesel fuel.
Then they people start yelling, "We got to get out of here, because this is going to explode. "
The tugboat, Mauvilla, was the first to report the accident.
They the [inaudible] be no fire [inaudible].
It's so foggy I can't tell.
Just have a look on my radar, so there's something bad, wrong [inaudible].
It was a hell on earth kind of an environment.
It was just a horrific, horrific sight.
Trudy grabbed her husband, Larry, and swam for shore.
Larry, and swam for shore.
The fire just was getting bigger.
You see nothing.
I heard people saying, "Oh, we're going to die.
We're going to die. " And I heard the Lord's Prayer.
The Mauvilla headed towards the flames, through the dense fog, to investigate.
I didn't know where the boat came from.
We had no idea.
All we know is the spotlights on us.
And, of course, we could see that it was-- you could hear it.
The crew pulled 17 passengers from the water.
Others were less fortunate.
The parent's of a little girl-- she was 10 years old and handicapped-- they pushed her to the arms of a rescuer through a window on their car.
10 years old and handicapped-- they pushed her to the arms of a rescuer through a window on their car.
And they didn't make it out.
Of the 220 passengers and crew on board, 47 people were dead or unaccounted for.
47 people were dead or unaccounted for.
The FBI immediately flew to the crash site to investigate the possibility of terrorism.
The Coast Guard and the National Transportation Safety Board also sent investigators.
The lead locomotive was found buried in the mud at about a 45 degree angle, and 3/4 of it you could not see.
It just buried itself into the marsh.
A second engine was alongside.
A third was on the opposite side of the bridge.
Four derailed cars were nearby.
As a local salvage crew began the grim task of pulling the dead from the bayou, investigators wanted to know what caused the deadliest accident in Amtrak history.
In the early hours of September 22, 1993, Amtrak's Sunset Limited plummeted off the Bayou Canot bridge in Alabama killing 42 passengers and five crew members.
Amtrak's Sunset Limited plummeted off the Bayou Canot bridge in Alabama killing 42 passengers and five crew members.
10 minutes before the Sunset Limited derailed a freight train crossed the bridge in the opposite direction without incident.
So what happened in those 10 minutes?
Divers recovered the trains event recorder from the bayou, which is like an airline's flight data recorder.
The tape revealed the train was traveling at 72 miles per hour, and there was no break application.
Whatever caused the crash, the engineer never saw it.
Investigators also discovered the signals on the track were green.
The signals are controlled by a current that goes through the rail.
And if the rail breaks, the signal will immediately turn red.
So the signal didn't turn red.
The bridge was originally built in three sections.
The southern section was a 165 foot steel truss bridge.
The center section, a single 140 foot steel girder, was originally designed to pivot so river traffic could pass through.
The northern section was simply 192 feet of track laid on top of a wooden trestle.
The center section was totally destroyed.
Despite it's design, the swing feature of the bridge was never used.
And investigators discovered it wasn't connected properly.
Since they never did use it as a swing bridge, they never did put in the same amount of tie downs at the ends of the bridge to hold it in place.
Divers also examined the wood pilings that supported the bridge.
We wanted to determine if the piles had undergone any kind of, deterioration, such as damage from wood destroying organisms-- like soft rot or brown rot Under a powerful microscope, scientists examined the cell walls of the samples.
Under a powerful microscope, scientists examined the cell walls of the samples.
They looked for triangular shaped microorganisms like these, which would indicate rot.
Since we didn't find them present, then we were fairly comfortable that there was no appreciable deterioration of the piles, contributing to the collapse.
All that remained were three concrete piers.
When investigators looked more closely, they discovered that the steel plates used to connect the bridge to the concrete were displaced 48 inches out of alignment.
Corely also examined the bolts that attached the metal plates to the concrete.
Those attachments were poorly maintained.
In several cases, the holes that we're supposed to have bolts through them didn't have anything recognizable in them.
When we took the material out that was in those holes, we found that it was rust.
When the Sunset Limited was pulled out of the water of Bayou Canot with sections of the bridge, it was evident that something terrible had happened.
Investigators found that one of it's sides, a metal girder, had been sheared ofr-- as if struck on the end by a powerful force.
Corely measured the spacing of the girders rivets and compared them to scratches along the side of the train's engine.
The rivets made lines down the side of the engine.
And you could match the lines made by those rivets with the bridge and confirm that that was what destroyed the grider on the bridge.
But how did the train hit the outside of the bridge?
While structural engineers examined all the evidence, Coast Guard investigators began interviewing eyewitnesses.
Coast Guard investigators began interviewing eyewitnesses.
What they were about to learn would provide a surprising lead to the investigation.
Investigators had many questions, but few answers to what caused the crash of Amtrak's Sunset Limited.
Coast Guard investigators also interviewed the men and women who helped in the rescue.
My first stop was actually to interview the crew of the tugboat, Mauvilla, and that was because they were the reporting party of the accident.
On the night of the crash, the Mauvilla was making a routine run up the Mobile River pushing a load of coal and pig iron.
The Mauvilla was pushing six barges, so the pilot was 400 feet away from the front of the barges.
Investigators learned that the pilot, Willy Odom, called the Coast Guard, three hours before the train crash, to report thick fog on the Mobile River.
About a half hour before the accident, Odom said he steered his six barges around a bend in the Mobile River and saw what appeared to be another tugboat on his radar.
Odom said he steered his six barges around a bend in the Mobile River and saw what appeared to be another tugboat on his radar.
He said he steered towards it hoping to tie onto it until visibility improved.
But before that could happen Willy Odom said his tugboat ran aground.
At this point Captain Andrew Stabler took over command of the Mauvilla and called the Coast Guard asking for help.
And if anybody down there can help rounded them up, I would definitely appreciate it.
I would definitely appreciate it.
Around 2:50 AM the Mauvilla's crew heard a crash, then saw a fire through the fog.
I'm not sure what I'm seeing, but I'm seeing something that's burning.
And it looks like it's crossways of the river.
How it got out that far, if that's what I'm looking at, I don't have any idea.
I don't have any idea.
But if the Mauvilla was on the Mobile River, how were they able to see an accident on the Bayou Canot six miles away.
Canot six miles away.
We have got a mess up here.
This train has run off the 14-mile railroad bridge.
But that was a mistake.
The accident was on the bridge going across the Bayou Canot-- a waterway that was closed to commercial boat traffic.
Bayou Canot is a subsidiary of the Mobile River.
And in that very dense fog, the operator of the tug mistakenly turned down into Bayou Canot, thinking it was a bend in the river a couple miles further up river than where he really was.
But how could this happen?
Investigators discovered that the Mauvilla had no maps on board, or even a compass.
That's a very important thing.
But the people in the river don't look at it that way.
All you do is steer between the banks, and that's it.
The Mauvilla was equipped with radar, which wasn't required at the time.
But the pilot, Willie Odum, wasn't trained to use it.
In conclusion, he didn't know anything about the radar.
He could turn it on.
He could look at it and tell you there's a picture on there.
But he didn't now anything about the function of the radar.
When investigators heard Odum's story, they went back to the bridge to examine what now seems like a key piece of evidence.
The railroad bridge had a concrete pier that was holding up the bridge structure.
And there was very fresh damage to the concrete of the bridge pier.
Something had hit the point of the pier.
Was it one of the Mauvilla's barges?
Had the Mauvilla caused the Sunset Limited to derail?
When we found the left hand barge, there was a similar mark of spray paint and an indentation into the middle.
And in fact, it kind of looked t-shaped, which would indicate that the barge hit the top or flat portion, as well as the edge of it.
And that kind of gave it a little t-shaped mark.
The other barges revealed more surprising clues.
The center barge also had damage.
There were vertical scrapes and an indentation.
A clue to the cause of the scrapes was found on the bridge's center span.
When we pulled the girder out of the water, we did a visual inspection.
And we noticed the some of the vertical steel members called stiffeners, that were on the side of the girder, had been bent flat against the girder.
Investigators measured the distance between the stiffeners and compared them to the vertical marks on the barge.
They were a perfect match.
Now they had solid evidence to prove what caused the fatal crash of the Sunset Limited.
Authorities knew that the tugboat Mauvilla was in the vicinity of the Bayou Canot bridge shortly before the train crash-- and not on the Mobile River, as the pilot thought.
River, as the pilot thought.
Investigators discovered concrete chips on the Mauvilla's front left barge.
The chips, along with samples from the bridge's pier, were sent to the FBI for analysis.
Each mix of concrete is unique.
It has a specific amount of rocks, sand, cement, and water in it.
The investigators cut the concrete samples into razor-thin slices, then studied them under a transmitter light microscope.
The microscope shines polarized light through the samples, revealing the specific optical properties of the rocks, sand, and cement.
The FBI, after they examined the samples they found on the barge, determined that the concrete on the barge was the same as that found in the pier at the south end of the bridge.
Based on all the evidence, the National Transportation Safety Board concluded that Willie Odum had gotten lost in the heavy fog as he piloted the Mauvilla up the Mobile River.
With no maps or compass on board, Odum wasn't trained to read the boat's radar.
Odum wasn't trained to read the boat's radar.
He mistakenly feared left onto the Bayou Canot, instead of continuing up the Mobile River.
Odum then mistook the radar image of the bridge for another tow barge.
As he tried to maneuver towards it, his front left barge struck the concrete south pier.
When Odum struck the bridge, he didn't know it, in part because he couldn't see the bridge through the fog since it was unlighted.
Odum mistakenly believed he had run aground.
Inexplicably, the collisions bent the track in an S shape but didn't break it, which explains why the electrical current running through the cracks didn't break either.
Had the track been severed, sure, that signal would have gone off down the line.
And there would've been a warning in Mobile that something was wrong at the track over Bayou Canot.
Coast guard records show the Mauvilla struck the bridge only eight minutes before the Sunset Limited arrived.
Limited arrived.
As the engineer headed towards the bridge, he saw a green light telling him the track ahead was all clear.
As the train approached, I believed that the engine derailed just as it was getting to the portion of the bridge that had been moved sideways.
And it hit that portion of the bridge, dragging the entire bridge, along with the engines, and destroying it.
It's a big piece of steel out on the bridge.
And the train struck it at 72 miles an hour.
And then, from that, you can tell that it just tore the hell out of it.
As the track collapsed, the lead engine, and the next four cars, flew into the water.
Some of the passenger cars stopped on the bridge, or the fatality count might have been higher.
Tragically, the train was running about a half hour late due to the stop to repair the air conditioning.
Had the train been on time, it would have crossed the bridge before the Mauvilla ran into it.
I think this investigation just confirmed for me a couple of longstanding philosophies that I've had.
One is that every accident is kind of a chain reaction.
There's five or six links in the chain that all have to happen in order for an accident to happen.
They never did put in the same amount of tie downs at the ends of the bridge to hold it in place.
Therefore, it wasn't as resistant to a barge hitting it as it would have been if they had tied it down at the ends People cause accidents.
People cause accidents.
And that was clearly the case here.
The Lord is my shepherd, therefore can I lack nothing.
He feeds me at a green pasture and leads me beside the waters of comfort.
A year after the accident, survivors gathered to remember those who lost their lives.
By then, new regulations were in place to prevent similar accidents.
Tug boats are now required to have radar on board.
And all operators are required to have formal training in how to use it.
The boats are also required to have a compass on board, as well as the necessary maps and river charts.
If the Mauvilla had only had a compass onboard, this accident might never have happened.
Had there been a compass, Willie Odum might have realized he was making a left turn and not gone down the wrong channel into Bayou Canot.
There's also a requirement for all bridges to have lighting, even those on waterways closed to commercial traffic.
Willie Odum was cleared of any criminal charges.
But he never again piloted a tugboat.
I think my main interest in all of the jobs I get into is to determine what went wrong so that we can learn from the bad things that have happened in the past and do better in the future.
I can't prevent what's happened.
But if I learned lessons from it and then make changes in rules, regulations, and procedures, I've done a lot to prevent that next one from happening.
A young woman died under suspicious circumstances, and there were no witnesses and very new leads.
But investigators hoped the tiny red fiber, some paper towels, and the tire could solve the mystery.
Interstate 97 runs along the eastern side of the Cascade Mountains in the Pacific Northwest.
Highway 97 is very well traveled and truck traffic is unbelievable, but it's a major state highway.
Early one June morning, a man driving along the interstate in Oregon spotted something on the side of the road.
When he stopped to investigate, he discovered it was a sleeping bag.
He went back to check it out to see if it was any good.
It was a decent sleeping bag so he threw it in the back of his truck.
But later that day, he took a closer look at it.
Inside, he found a pair of women's sneakers and a purse.
Both were covered in blood.
The first thing I thought was we had a female dead body somewhere on 97.
I mean, women don't leave their purse and sleeping bags.
There was no money inside the purse, but there was a driver's license.
It belonged to a 20-year-old woman named Carrie Love, who lived in a small town near Seattle about 400 miles from where the sleeping bag was found.
Carrie's mother told police that her daughter left home a few days earlier to visit her father in Los Angeles.
She told me that she was going to be staying with her father down there.
And she was really looking forward to that, because it been a while since she had seen him.
We walked for miles up 97, on both sides, just walking parallel to the road to see if we could find anything that was discovered.
But they found nothing.
Then Cooper remembered that there was an isolated truck stop about 15 miles from where the sleeping bag had been discarded.
It's out of the way.
It's dark, black, pitch black out there at night.
And if that's the case in this scenario, that's what I would have done.
I would have dumped her there.
There was a drag mark in the gravel where it appeared that something had been drug through the gravel parking And that's where they found Carrie Love's body buried beneath a mound of gravel.
And that's where they found Carrie Love's body buried beneath a mound of gravel.
Nearby, investigators found sheets of green paper towels with pieces of duct tape attached to the ends.
When I held this up to my face, I could see the nose and the chin, because whoever was wearing this had expired all this mucus and liquid into the paper, and then it dries.
We wanted to make sure anything that we had was preserved for the forensic aspect of this later on.
Blood, obviously, has to be preserved.
Fingerprints have to be preserved.
So when you start realizing you're dealing with a homicide, then everything is ratcheted up 100% in terms of making sure you take care of things.
Investigators were certain that something at the crime scene would lead them to the killer.
All they had to do was find it.
This young woman's dead.
She should be dead.
Now it's my life's job to make sure this person is punished for it.
Carrie Love's body was discovered in the hunting area of one of the most prolific serial killers in American history.
The first thing that flipped through my mind was had the Green River Killer to a hold of her.
More than 40 women had been killed in the area.
And the Green River Killer had never been apprehended.
Before police removed Carrie Love's body from the gravel pit, forensic scientist were careful to collect as much evidence as possible.
We did recover trace evidence from the body later that we might have lost If we'd just drug her out.
There was a fuzz ball of fibers was adhering to her abdomen.
And there was 12 or 14 different kinds of fibers.
Investigators hope that Carrie's autopsy wouldn't tell them what happened during her last moments alive.
The autopsy lasted, I think, a little over nine hours.
And that was because, in doing what we had to do, we set the pattern and the tone, and the group of guys that work with this, are the best you can get.
Under Carrie's fingernails were several red cotton fibers, an indication that she had fought her attacker.
Petechial hemorrhages in Carrie's eyes indicated she had been asphyxiated.
There were also two deep stab wounds to her chest.
And on our left arm and chest, investigators discovered what was perhaps the most telling piece of evidence.
These were contusions that brought blood up to the surface of the skin.
The pattern looked to some like tire impressions.
This came from the side of the tire being pressed down on her arm, but it was a very geometric pattern.
I mean, you could see it.
It was square and then there'd be a rounded part, and then a square part.
It just spoke to me that said, that's part of a tire.
The paper towels found near Carrie's body were a common brand, nothing unusual, but forensic scientist Mike Howard did find something distinctive.
You could just hold the towel up to the light, and there were the little holes along, and they were random, along one edge.
Each brand has a unique pattern, which is produced by large rollers in the manufacturing process.
This roller will start to wear, and when it does, sometimes it will actually punch clear through the paper towel and leave holes.
In this particular case, the paper towels did have a blemish in it where the roller had been punching through and leaving random holes in the towels.
I went around to various stores.
I probably bought about 100 rolls of towels.
None of them had the little holes in like that did.
Investigators learned that Carrie Love worked as a dispatcher for a small trucking company called Northern Star.
The owner of the company was a man named, Jesse Pratt.
When I first saw his picture, I thought he was the reject from Hell's Angels.
It was my first impression.
He added this bushy permed long hair, and scruffy-looking, just a real scary type person.
Pratt told police that he offered Carrie a ride to Los Angeles in his truck, but Carrie declined.
She wanted to take an airplane instead.
Carrie decided, according to Jesse, that she wasn't going to drive to LA, she now wanted him to drop her off at Sea-Tac airport in Seattle.
But none of the flight manifests showed Carrie Love on board.
Obviously, being in this business, you knew that was a crappy story, but he had to make up something.
A background check revealed Pratt had been married four times and had a history of violence towards women.
All of his ex-wives claimed he had beaten them.
Even worse, in 1981 Pratt was sentenced to 10 years for kidnapping one of his girlfriends, but was released after serving only 10 months in prison.
He served time in Walla Walla prison.
Unfortunately, he was let out way earlier than he should have been let out.
Some of his past girlfriends told investigators Pratt had been involved in prostitution.
Every girlfriend he had, he tried to make a hooker out of.
It was just a matter of time and, frankly, I'm stunned that there aren't more victims out there.
Jesse Pratt is the most pathological, destructive criminal that's come through here, and we've had several.
When police looked inside Pratt's truck, at first they found little of value.
It was obvious the truck had been cleaned up.
It was too clean.
There weren't even hardly fingerprints in that truck.
So forensic scientists would have to look elsewhere, because evidence is often in the most unlikely spot.
Jesse Pratt acknowledged that Carrie Love worked for him as an administrative assistant while Pratt hauled freight with this 18-wheel truck.
Pratt said he offered Carrie a ride to Los Angeles to visit her father, but Carrie refused.
And he said he dropped her off at the Seattle airport and drove to Los Angeles alone.
When we examined the truck, there were two rolls of paper towels in the truck, one of which was opened.
And it just happened to be Bounty brand.
It was the same brand and color of paper towels used in Carrie's asphyxiation.
I stripped some of the green die out and did an analysis of the dye so the dyes were the same.
I ran them on an instrument called an X-ray fluorescence spectrometer to look for the metal elements that were present, even though there weren't a lot.
What are metals doing in paper?
When the wood is made into pulp, the excess fibers are removed with sulfur, some of which remains in the paper.
And sodium from the wood remains in the paper end product, too.
In a process known as ashing, Howard burned each sample to ash.
A neutral chemical compound was added, then placed in the fluorescence spectrometer where the metals fluoresce as the X-rays pass through.
Both samples had identical amounts of sulfur, sodium, potassium, and other trace metals.
They had the same metallic components in the towels, so we were able to link those towels from the dump scene back directly to the towels in the truck.
The roll of towels in the truck also had the same puncture marks from the manufacturing rollers as the towels at the crime scene.
Next, forensic scientists compared the red cotton fibers underneath carries fingernails to a red cotton t-shirt Pratt was wearing when police questioned him.
Pratt was wearing when police questioned him.
They were microscopically similar, made from the same materials and the same dyes.
That fingernail raked the article of clothing.
It could've been done in passion.
It could've been in hatred.
It could have been in fighting.
The fibers from the discarded sleeping bag were also discovered in the sleeping area of Pratt's truck.
So we now had a fiber link with multiple fibers to link Carrie Love both with the sleeper compartment and with the trunk, and with the sleeping bag at the dump scene.
Among Pratt's business papers, Cooper found an interesting lead.
Cooper found an interesting lead.
A gas receipt for the day before Carrie's body was discovered.
For diesel fuel in Redd's Gasoline Station.
So Cooper called Redd's Gas Station to see if they could remember Jesse Pratt.
And he says, yeah, that driver had a full beard and a big pot belly.
And I'm sitting there, I'm starting to breathe hard, because I can't believe what he's recalling.
And I says is there anything else?
He says, yeah, that young good looking little girl that was with him.
When faced with this eyewitness testimony and forensic evidence, Pratt quickly changed his story.
He now admitted that Carrie had been in the sleeper compartment of his truck, because the two had consensual sex, but said Carrie had stolen some money from him during the trip.
So he was angry at her.
They had some fights over it, but then after they got up on Highway 58, he just couldn't take it anymore, and he boot her out of the truck at night, and said find your own way.
Now to me, that was the stupidest story you could've made up, because if I'd had been on a jury, I'd have convicted of murder just for that.
I'd have convicted of murder just for that.
Jesse could look at me, smile, carry on a conversation, and I knew from his demeanor and his tone of voice, he was flat out lying.
Or creating whatever he wanted me to believe.
But investigators wanted to do one more test.
They wanted an expert to examine the tires on Pratt's truck.
Could they hold the key to the death of Carrie Love?
Investigators knew that Carrie Love's killer had driven over her body after she was dead.
There was a tire pattern across her chest, and a strange burn pattern across her left forearm that appeared to be caused by friction.
The mark resembled the pattern found on the side of a truck tire.
It wasn't the flat portion of the tire that was burned into her.
It was the side of the tire.
To see of one of Jesse Pratt's tires had caused these injuries, investigators called Peter McDonald, the premier tire evidence expert in the country.
They had heard about my expertise and thought this might be useful.
The first thing McDonald had to do was to take impressions of every tire on Jesse Pratt's truck.
He knew just by looking at the tires that all 18 tires had recently been retreaded.
And for some unexplained reason, all the tread patterns were different.
The tire mark across Carrie Love's body appeared to resemble the right rear tire on Pratt's truck.
The question now was whether the side pattern on that tire could be matched to the burn mark on Carrie Love's left forearm.
When a tire is retreaded, a new sheet of rubber tracking is glued onto the tires' core, and is then spliced together.
McDonald was most interested in that splice where the retread was glued together on the outside of the tire.
He laid paper over the side of the tire, and pushed it down to lift the impression.
The side pattern on the tire was a short bar followed by a rounded square.
But at the point where the retread was spliced together, the bar was shorter than anywhere else on the tire.
The one particular bar that I focused my attention to was unique.
And that only would occur where there's a splice of the retread.
Back in his lab, McDonald cut out the pattern, mounted it on a rubber stamp, then applied ink.
He pressed it on his left forearm.
The pattern was identical to the pattern burned into Carrie Love's arm, and identical to the side pattern on the tire from Jesse Pratt's truck.
Love's arm, and identical to the side pattern on the tire from Jesse Pratt's truck.
Both patterns had the same shortened bar at the spot where the retread was spliced together.
That same short bar showed up on Carrie Love's arm.
If it hadn't been for these unique features, I couldn't have made a positive identification.
I couldn't have made a positive identification.
On that same tire, McDonald noticed a serial number XZA9219 on the new retread.
He traced that number back to the company that treaded the tire.
The manager revealed the tire was retreaded just two months before Carrie's death.
And he also revealed who had paid for the work.
The check that was written for $278 for a retread, and it was signed by the victim, Carrie Love.
It's been shown by the number of women that he has hurt in the past before Carrie that he can't be in society.
And he needs to be held accountable for what he has done.
Prosecutors believe Carrie accepted Pratt's offer of a ride to Los Angeles.
Pratt's offer of a ride to Los Angeles.
Along the way, Pratt demanded sex.
Carrie refused, and there was a confrontation.
The forensic evidence suggests that Pratt covered her nose and mouth with the paper towels and stabbed her to death.
But in the struggle, Carrie grabbed Pratt's shirt, and those red cotton fibres help tie Pratt to the crime.
In a final act of vengeance, Pratt drove over her with his truck.
He later hid the body underneath the gravel at the truck stop, and discarded Carrie's sleeping bag and personal items along the side of the highway.
Every piece of forensic evidence pointed towards Jesse Pratt.
The red cotton fibers underneath Carrie's fingernails with the same as those from Pratt's shirt.
The paper towels held over Carrie's mouth were from the open roll in Pratt's truck.
And the tire impression on Carrie's arm that matched the tire on Pratt's truck all told the same story.
I thought we had a pretty strong forensic case.
Jesse Pratt was tried and convicted of aggravated murder and was sentenced to death.
I never felt it was open and shut, because juries, you don't know what juries are talking about back there.
You don't know.
One person could take over the jury and just ruin all the work that the attorneys have done.
I don't think Jesse Pratt would ever have dreamt that his own tire tracks would help convict him of murder.
The weapon that he used to maim and mutilate her, and do horrible things to her head, to have that bite him in the back, so to speak, was just incredible.
I've been here 18 years, and this is by far the best, most well investigated case that I've ever seen.
The whole process was just amazing.
In my next lifetime I want to be a forensic scientist.
People on television and in movies attract attention everywhere they go.
But not all of the attention is welcome.
Tragically, a television reporter in Michigan was killed outside her home after she received numerous threatening letters.
A document examiner, criminal profiler, and the police dog all found evidence pointing to the same suspect.
But the most persuasive evidence came from the dog.
Diane Newton King found everything she was looking for in Battle Creek, Michigan.
We must do all in our power to support our men and women now fighting in the Middle East, knowing-- She was a news reporter for the local television station, had a nice home, was married, and had two beautiful children.
She was a news reporter for the local television station, had a nice home, was married, and had two beautiful children.
Diane Newton King was the kind of woman that when she walked into a room, eyes turned to look at her.
Not only because of the way she looked with her attractive Native American looks, but she was type of woman who always had a smile on her face, was very animated, and people's eyes were just naturally drawn toward her.
Three and a half years in a Japanese prisoner of war camp-- Diane had a reputation as a tough, aggressive reporter.
Diane had a reputation as a tough, aggressive reporter.
She would push.
I mean, to get a story, she would push.
And sometimes, maybe, she'd push hard.
Although Diane called the viewer's attention, it wasn't always in the way she wanted.
She started receiving harassing phone calls and letters from an obsessed fan.
It was a man who identified himself as a person who want to get an industry and wanted to go to lunch with her.
Wanted to meet her.
And he began pestering her, sometimes calling as much as once a day.
Station executives hired an additional security guard and screened all of Diane's calls.
Diane's husband Brad, a former policeman, took precautions of his own.
They put in security lights.
Automatic lights that would come on when someone would come into the yard.
The sister gave them a doberman pinscher that was used as a watchdog.
But the harassment continued, including this letter sent to her home.
The words created by letters cut from magazines said, you should have gone to lunch with me.
That's when things began to get very scary, is when they found the first letter in her mailbox.
Because before, no one knew where she lived.
Diane gave the letter to local police.
I have never found one case where a stranger cut letters out and put it on sheet of paper.
You see on TV.
You see it in the movies.
But you don't see that in real life.
A few weeks later, someone broke into the King's home while the family was away, but nothing was stolen.
These bizarre incidents culminated in tragedy one Saturday afternoon in 1991.
Diane's husband Brad came home and found Diane lying the driveway, dead of an apparent gunshot wound to the chest.
Their two children were still inside the car, alive, but frightened.
The police were concerned that they may have been partially responsible.
One of the detectives called that night to the murder scene, his first reaction was, oh my god, we've screwed up.
He was worried that the letter had languished on his desk for a couple months, and they hadn't really done any serious investigation on it.
There were several clues in that letter, but not the kind of police expected.
Diane King's murder was front page news in the small town of Battle Creek.
Investigators hoped to find some clues during the autopsy, and it revealed something telling.
Diane King had been shot not once, but twice with a .22 caliber rifle.
The angle of the shot to the chest was slightly downward.
That is, as it passed from front to back, it passed slightly downward, indicating that the weapon was slightly above her when fired.
The second shot followed a completely different trajectory.
The second one was most unusual.
This wound entered just above the pubic bone and passed very sharply upward.
That is, it passed through some of the intestines, through the left lung, and I recovered that bullet next to the left collarbone.
Apparently, the killer fired once from above and then he moved closer and lower before he fired again.
He or she would have to be either kneeling or perhaps prone on the ground, holding the weapon essentially parallel, or almost parallel to the ground.
At the crime scene, investigators identified the possible location of the shooter.
In the hayloft of the barn next to the driveway was a single .22 caliber shell casing.
It kind of sent goosebumps on my back to know that we were that close, perhaps, to whoever had committed this crime.
I mean, we were standing right in the same place that he had stood probably within the hour.
With the police personnel helping to recreate the crime, investigators used a laser to confirm this was the sniper's nest.
We knew the angle of the trajectory in the body was from the autopsy.
And we tried to determine if that was consistent with having been shot from the loft of the barn.
And by directing the laser beam from the loft to where the victim stood, we were able to say that that angle was consistent.
Next, Michigan State trooper Gary Lisle and his tracking dog Travis tried to pick up the killers scent.
Shell casing of any weapon ejects to the right when it's fired.
So I moved to the left side of the shell casing.
And Travis indicated that he had a track at that point, and we started from that point.
Dogs can track someone by his scent, which is unique.
A combination of dead skin cells that fall, plus perspiration.
The adrenaline flows.
Their heart pumps faster.
They sweat. They get excited.
It's a whole different odor than a person that's, say, confused, or a person that's lost.
Travis followed the scent from the sniper's nest in the barn, across a small foot bridge, over a creek, and then took a sharp left turn.
Travis brought the track up to here.
And this is where Travis got real excited.
Here, they found the exposed end of a .22 caliber Remington scoremaster 511 rifle that had been jammed into the mud.
Remington scoremaster 511 rifle that had been jammed into the mud.
In the water nearby were seven spent shell cartridges.
Everyone was pretty excited because they knew that probably was the murder weapon.
Because there'd be no other reason for anyone else to stick something like that into a creek bed at that particular time.
At the crime lab, ballistic experts test fired the rifle, giving them it's fingerprint, a unique mark on the bottom of each shell created by the rifle's firing pin.
The fired cartridge case that was recovered from the loft of the barn and the seven cartridge cases from the creek were identified as all having been extracted by the firearm in question.
But it was impossible to match the bullets to the rifle.
And the reason for that was the condition of the bullets.
They were damaged from impacting with the target, the body in this case.
And it made it difficult to make any positive determination.
Back at the crime scene, Travis wasn't yet finished with his investigation.
Travis wasn't yet finished with his investigation.
After finding the rifle and the shell casings, he jumped the stream and picked up the killer's scent once again.
It's just amazing, what the dog's sensibility is.
And you just wonder how in the world they can do this, and find things that they find.
Travis followed the scent into the woods, out into the street, then surprisingly, back to the crime scene.
If Travis was correct, the killer was one of the bystanders watching as police conducted their investigation.
Shortly after Diane King's funeral, her mother gave police an important piece of information about the murder.
Something Brad King failed to mention.
The original plan was that Diane and was going to leave her two children with her mother, and then come back to be with Brad that weekend so the two of them had some time together alone.
But on February 9, and apparently because one of the children wasn't feeling too well, Diane decided to take the kids with her and make the two hour trip back to Marshall, Michigan.
Diane decided to take the kids with her and make the two hour trip back to Marshall, Michigan.
We have a victim who gets out of her car.
We don't have any evidence that would suggest that she was afraid of anything.
She did not take any kind of defensive action.
And we have an offender who not only is comfortable at the crime scene, he's also comfortable walking up to the victim, and shooting her again.
Brad King was a part time college professor teaching criminology, and he didn't have a solid alibi.
Brad told investigators he was out walking in the woods behind his home and showed investigators where he'd been.
But Travis, the police dog, identified this same area as the killer's get away route.
He showed that he would have to have seen anybody come his way and run down the track where the dog took.
And he would have seen anybody commit that crime coming from the barn.
And of course, that was never brought up.
Brad denied owning a .22 caliber rifle.
However, in his home were .22 caliber bullets similar, but not identical, to the brand used in the murder.
There was also a cleaning rod for a .22 caliber rifle.
We had the two cleaning ladies come forward, who claimed to have seen a similar rifle on the bar of the basement of a townhouse that the Kings rented here in the city of Battle Creek.
I can recall seeing it every time we was there.
It was a .22 rifle.
Police found another inconsistency in the case of the attempted burglary of the King's home a few weeks before the murder.
As everybody knows, who watches any kind of television show, that if you're breaking in to a house, the glass should be on the inside.
In this case, the glass was on the outside.
So whoever broke it had to be inside at the time that the window was broken.
Next, investigators turn their attention to the threatening letter mailed to Diane's home.
Statistically, only 1% of all threatening letters have cut out pieces.
One the most telling aspects of this crime.
And that was one where the letters were cut out of a magazine and pasted onto a blank sheet of paper.
I have, in my career, never seen a letter like that where it wasn't somebody emotionally close to the victim.
A perpetrator uses cut out letters when the victim would be able to identify his handwriting.
Unfortunately, by the time the letter was sent to the FBI for analysis, and there was no hope of finding any fingerprints.
The anonymous note had been processed by the originating agency with a powder.
And in my opinion, that's not the correct process to use.
And it's very difficult, once it's been processed with the powder, to do any other chemical process on the document.
I had the office of Brad King at Western Michigan University searched with a search warrant and items seized.
I wanted scissors, razor blades, tape, paste, anything paper, anything that we might be able to link to forensic science to Bradford King.
We were unable to do that.
In terms of motive, police found evidence of spousal abuse, sexual affairs, and Diane's overall dissatisfaction with her husband's lifestyle.
She came in one morning, and she was crying, and she had bruises.
She showed me the bruises.
And this was right around Christmas time.
And she said that her and Brad had been in a fight.
Brad's a very different individual.
I think he can have people like him real quick, and also have them turned off real quick, just by his mood.
And friends say Diane wanted Brad to get a full time job.
Brad to get a full time job.
Well, Brad had the perfect set up.
He was working part time as an instructor at Western Michigan University.
But I think she was pushing that issue so much that he feared that he was not going to be able to continue this lifestyle that he had at the University.
His wife was responsible for taking care of the kids and getting them money.
And I think she was angry at him because he wasn't carrying his load.
She was known to order him around and to yell at him.
And I think it just reached a crisis point with him.
And he lashed out at her in this very passive aggressive manner, by murdering her.
Brad's alleged sexual affairs were with students from the college where he taught.
He was not faithful to his wife.
He had an affair with a student in one of his classes.
He had an affair with another woman that he had met in Battle Creek.
He was known to be trying to procure women, girlfriends, sometimes at the fraternity house they used to hang out at, with younger fraternity members.
Was not a picture of fidelity by any stretch of imagination.
One year after his wife's death, Bradford King was arrested and charged with murder.
Bradford King was arrested and charged with murder.
The prosecutor and investors in this case were worried that because the suspect was a former police officer and a criminal injustice instructor at a major university, was going to spring something on them.
That was playing some kind of mind game with them.
Kind of a forensic cat and mouse game.
And sure enough, of a new piece of evidence surfaced threatening prosecutor's case.
Just as Bradford King was about to go on trial for the murder of his wife Diane, prosecutors were dealt a serious setback.
A man moving into the King's neighborhood said he found a Remington 511 scoremaster rifle in his attic.
It was virtually identical to the alleged murder weapon.
The second rifle was sent to the forensic lab for testing.
The ballistic tests on the second gun showed that the shell casing found in the loft could not have possibly come from the gun, the second gun that was accumulated by police.
Prosecutors believe Brad planted this rifle in a vacant home nearby to create reasonable doubt in the jury's mind.
And that it was Brad who made the threatening calls, sent the threatening letter, and staged the burglary, making the mistake of breaking the window from the inside rather than the outside.
On of the day of the murder, Diane planned to take the children to their grandparents' house to spend the night.
While she was gone, Brad test fired his rifle to align the sight and carefully collected the empty shell casings.
Later, when Diane came home, Brad was waiting for in the loft.
His second shot at close range after he left the barn.
A clear sign of hatred and anger.
Then Brad realized the children were in the car, not knowing one of them was sick.
Since he couldn't leave his small children in the cold for very long, he needed to change plans.
So he quickly disposed of the rifle near the creek, threw the empty shells in the water, then went back to the house to call police.
But Brad left one shell casing behind in the loft.
And this shell casing tied his rifle to the murder.
And he was unaware that a police dog would track his scent from the sniper's nest, to the creek, into the woods, then full circle back to his house.
I think he had that foreknowledge that this was sort of a small town police operation.
And being the criminal injustice-- criminal justice instructor, and the type of individual he was, that I felt that he thought that he could out wit them.
Many believe the children foiled his plans to establish a solid alibi.
I don't believe he anticipated the children would be there.
I think it's likely that he would have gone someplace else and had somebody else find his wife.
That would give him an alibi.
Diane told friends shortly before her death that she suspected Brad was behind the threatening calls and letters.
And she said, I just think it's Brad.
And she said, I don't know what I'm going to do yet.
The defense presented only seven witnesses, arguing that the case against Brad was circumstantial.
No one will get one the stand and say, Brad King had a gun that day.
Brad King had a gun that day.
Brad King held a gun that day.
He pulled a trigger that day.
I was confident in my own mind that Brad King was guilty.
I just didn't know if I could convince 12 people of that.
The jury felt the forensic evidence was just as revealing, if not more so, than any eye witness.
We the jury, find Bradford King, count one, guilty of first degree premeditated murder.
Brad King was sentenced to life in prison without parole.
When I'm looking at evidence, firearms evidence or other types of evidence, and I can make an identification, a positive identification that is helpful to the investigation, it's a good feeling when that can be done.
All of the forensic science fit together and pointed and in the direction of Brad King being the murderer of his wife.
You may assume or may suspect that a particular person was involved, but without those scientists to tie them together for you, you have no case.
I don't think we touch what a dog's nose can do.
Every day I see him do things that would just-- you just stand back and say, how could they?
Investigators search through the remnants of a house fire that killed the wife of a policeman.
At first, carelessness looked like the probable cause.
But when pathologists, toxicologists, and chemists took a closer look around they found the cause was far more complicated.
On a cold February morning in Green Bay, Wisconsin, Lola Cator drove to her daughter's home and discovered there had been some sort of accident.
Lola Cator drove to her daughter's home and discovered there had been some sort of accident.
It was just totally black.
Just totally full of soot.
I couldn't find Sandy and I ran all over that house, calling for her.
And then I saw that she was on the couch.
She was totally burned.
Sandy Maloney was just 40 years old.
It hurt. I was shocked.
I didn't really, you know, didn't at first register that actually, that Sandy was dead.
I walked in the room and my dad just started crying and I kind of assumed what happened.
Then he just told me there was a fire at the house and they found someone inside, and they think it's my mom.
Sandy lived alone, since she was separated from her husband.
It appeared the fire started at 7:30 the night before.
The clock had stopped when the fire melted its inner-workings.
Local fire officials identified the fire's origin by the distinctive v-shaped pattern on the wall.
When fire burns, it burns upward and outward.
And it leaves telltale signs on the walls, furniture, ceiling, and that type of thing.
In this particular situation I did observe a v-pattern consistent with the fire burning on the couch.
Which is where Sandy's body was found.
The fire didn't spread beyond the living room.
The supply of oxygen appeared not to have been sufficient to allow that fire to burn freely.
And when the oxygen had been depleted in the structure, the fire burned itself out.
The living room was littered with empty vodka bottles and cigarette butts.
A lot of overflowing ashtrays, cigarettes that had just been laid down on table tops and phone books that literally burnt themselves out in scorched surfaces.
Investigators knew Sandy Maloney, since her husband was a fellow police officer.
Sandy was the love of my life.
It's like your soul mate that, you know, that the one time that you meet someone in your life that, you know, you feel like you're going to spend the rest of your life with them.
In the early '90s Sandy injured her back and became addicted to pain killers.
She also started drinking heavily.
Two separate hospital visits failed to cure her addiction.
It totally consumed who she was.
She was no longer that fun wife and great mother.
The kids would get home from school and Sandy would already be totally intoxicated.
You know, at the point of staggering, you know, not really being able to talk all that well even.
I knew things were wrong.
I mean, one, there's bill collectors calling and things like that.
And when you have an addiction you're losing money to feed that addiction.
And they didn't have money to pay their bills.
And that's what most of the arguments that my mom and dad had were surrounding.
So I wasn't totally oblivious it what was going on.
Not surprisingly, when the Maloneys separated, John got custody of their three children.
John got custody of their three children.
Sandy continued on a downward spiral.
There was arguing and John was just swearing and just angry all the time.
And things got worse all around.
That house was like it was going to explode.
She just mostly stayed in the house and kept the phone off the hook, and pretty much lost contact with everyone who she used to talk to.
The preliminary indications were that the fire started by a cigarette Sandy left burning carelessly.
Sandy left burning carelessly.
But Sandy's autopsy said something quite different.
To find out for certain what killed Sandy Maloney, her body was sent to the medical examiner for an autopsy.
When you look at a fire death, what you're looking for are injuries that are not consistent with the fire.
Sandy had a history of alcohol and drug abuse, so blood samples were sent for toxicology testing.
Using gas chromatography, scientists could identify all of the elements present in Sandy's system.
Sandy's blood alcohol level was 0.25, more than twice the legal limit in Wisconsin.
Forensic pathologists, for the most part, do not consider a blood alcohol level to be in the lethal range until it gets up above 0.4, especially in someone that was a chronic drinker.
Sandy was discovered face down on the sofa.
That's not a common scenario for someone that is just intoxicated.
They would tend to collapse and, and even though they are intoxicated, the lower brain stem functions, if you will, will sort of make their face move to the side so they can get some air.
She was face down into that pillow.
And there was something else suspicious.
The carbon monoxide levels in her blood were only 8%.
When a person dies as a result of a fire, their carbon monoxide levels are usually up 70% or higher.
Uh, so the carbon monoxide levels of Sandra Maloney at the time of death were consistent with her being dead prior to the fire.
And the medical examiner found even more evidence to support this view.
You would expect the entire trachea to have a black lining of soot, all the way from the upper portion of the throat all the way down and spreading out into the two lungs.
Sandy only had a very small amount of soot in her airway.
Much less than we would normally see.
And there were bruises in the muscles around Sandy's neck and her back.
This would be very consistent with someone being on top of her, maybe a knee, maybe arms, as she is being held down into the cushion of the couch and strangled.
They also found a vertical, not horizontal, gash on the back of Sandy's head.
There was a broken ashtray there in the room.
Whether or not that was the implement that was used, that is the type of implement-- a heavy, edged object like this ashtray-- that could have caused this kind of an injury.
Sandy was found on the sofa without a blouse.
In a basement clothes hamper investigators found a corduroy shirt covered with blood.
Somebody apparently attempted to have that concealed under some other clothing.
But the bleeding on that corduroy shirt was consistent with where her head injury was on her body.
And that raised a lot of red flags.
Given the totality of the evidence that we had in this case, it was obvious that this was definitely a homicide.
This was death at the hands of another.
At the scene of the fire, investigators found several suspicious items-- a burned book of matches underneath a cloth baseball cap, and tissues rolled and stuffed into the seat cushions.
Arson investigators call them trailers.
These trailers that I saw on the couch and in front of the couch indicated to me that whoever committed this crime had some, at least fundamental, knowledge of fire and how fire burned, and what methods to use to carry fire from one place to another.
Now, with evidence of a homicide and arson, Sandy's estranged husband, John, became the prime suspect.
Sandy's estranged husband, John, became the prime suspect.
But he had an alibi.
He was at home with his girlfriend on the night of the fire.
My kids were with me all night, and Tracy Hellenbrand was there.
We just thought maybe randomly something happened.
Maybe one of her friends, maybe they were getting into drugs bad or something like that.
Despite the alibi, investigators noted that John had recently taken classes in arson investigation as part of his ongoing training as a police officer.
I can tell you, absolutely, that I did not have anything to do with Sandy's death.
I did not kill Sandy.
To solve the mystery of Sandy Maloney's death, investigators needed to know as much as possible about the house fire.
The evidence clearly showed it started in the living room.
The burn patterns on the floor in front of the couch, at the area of deep charring and back away toward the center of the room, that pattern was very reminiscent of a liquid-type of accelerant being poured on the floor.
It was a very irregular, elongated pattern.
Debris from the couch area was collected in an airtight can and sent to the Wisconsin State crime lab for testing.
At the lab, scientists placed an activated charcoal strip inside to collect gases from the debris.
Later, it was washed in a sterile solution and analyzed.
A gas chromatograph, which is a piece of equipment that can actually look for the individual components inside gasoline, kerosene, et cetera.
And they get, basically, a tracing.
Looks like, kind of like an EKG, up and down lines.
But those peaks, to the forensic chemist, mean different things, mean different particular chemical components.
The chromatograph found no accelerants in the debris.
But the empty vodka bottle at the fire scene suggested a possible explanation.
It would not be unusual for vodka to have been used as an accelerant, and then have the lab results come back negative, because the vodka either burned up as a result of the fire or dissipated after the fire.
There was one piece of evidence that suggested Sandy must have known the person who started the fire.
There were no signs of forced entry, and all of the doors were locked.
One key to the door was found on Sandra Maloney's key chain laying on the cupboard in the kitchen.
A second key had been given to John Maloney, years before, when the door was installed, and never returned.
And there were only two keys to that door.
So immediately that brought John Maloney into the forefront as a suspect.
Sandy's estranged husband denied this.
Her mother and I are not the only ones that had a key to the house.
There was a key that the kids had access to, her friends had duplicate keys.
So when I moved out of the house the locks were changed.
So I didn't have keys.
I had at-- I had at one point, had a key to an outside storm door lock.
That would be the only thing that I would have a key to.
And investigators found evidence of motive.
John had agreed to pay Sandy $450 a month in alimony, plus half his assets in pension in a divorce settlement.
Police now realized that John's girlfriend, Tracy Hellenbrand, may have had a financial motive as well.
There was some thought that they both do about the homicide, or maybe both participated.
So she was somebody that had some hostility towards Sandy Maloney, and it needed to be looked at.
Maloney, and it needed to be looked at.
Tracy said she was at home with John on the night of the murder.
But investigators added some pressure, telling her she could be charged as an accessory to the crime.
So she changed her story.
She now said she was taking a nap and didn't know where John was at the time of the fire.
She also said, John was behaving suspiciously later that night.
His girlfriend, Tracy, did point out some nervous behavior, some shaking when he was back at the residence.
And also some smell of smoke on his person.
Tracy agreed to help police by wearing a hidden microphone while she questioned John about the incident.
But during those conversations, John denied any involvement.
It wasn't until several months later, while on vacation in Las Vegas, that the conversations became more interesting.
Prosecutors believe that John Maloney grew angry with his wife, Sandy, because her drug and alcohol addiction had made it difficult to finalize their divorce.
So he went over to talk with her to make sure she was going to be at court the next day for the divorce hearing.
The evidence suggests the two argued.
And Sandy suffered a serious head injury, either intentionally or by accident.
At some point, he strangled her to death.
John removed her bloody shirt and hid it in the hamper.
To cover his tracks, John decided to set fire to the house and make it look like an accidental fire.
He inserted tissues in the sofa cushions to make sure it ignited.
And he may have used vodka as an accelerant.
John left the scene thinking the entire house would burn to the ground, and with it all the evidence of the murder.
But he was wrong.
There wasn't enough oxygen inside the house for the fire to spread.
And it burned out quickly.
There's absolutely no doubt in my mind that John Maloney is the killer.
John Maloney did not do very well as an arsonist.
He should have done a little more research.
To cement their case, investigators asked John's girlfriend, Tracy, to question him about the fire while they listened.
And they placed a hidden camera and microphone in their Las Vegas hotel room while they were there on vacation.
Vegas hotel room while they were there on vacation.
The surveillance in Las Vegas and what showed up on the tape really gave us an insight into, not only the relationship of John and Tracy, but, you know, his dark side.
And they also revealed John's feelings towards his estranged wife, Sandy.
It proves he hated her.
He hated her.
He called her f-ing slob, and f-ing anorexic drunk, and he just wanted to be rid of her.
After hours of denials, John eventually admitted he was inside his wife's home on the day of the fire.
John eventually admitted he was inside his wife's home on the day of the fire.
John Maloney had been maintaining, right from the beginning, that he hadn't been in the house and hadn't been in the house for a long time.
His admission that he was in the house on the night that the homicide occurred really pulled everything else together.
At one point in the conversation, it appeared that John would physically assault Tracy.
John Maloney has Tracy Hellenbrand backed up against the wall, and he does place his hands up near her throat.
And, you know, it just, it just flashed in my mind when I saw that, that John Maloney is very capable of committing this crime.
What people don't realize is it was like 4:30 in the morning that she woke me out of a sleep to start this interrogation.
I was very angry.
I was very angry that I was being accused continually of doing something, killing someone, when I hadn't.
But to investigators, the tape showed otherwise.
John Maloney was arrested and charged with his wife's murder.
At the trial his defense basically conceded the strength of the forensic evidence.
There was really not much effort made.
Matter of fact, no effort made during John's trial to challenge the state's assertion that this was, in fact, an incendiary fire.
He and his defense essentially rolled over and accepted the state's findings without a scientific challenge.
Instead, the defense pointed their finger at Tracy Hellenbrand saying, she was the real killer.
The physical evidence, the forensic evidence, the statements of witnesses, their observations, only point to one person, and that's John Maloney.
We the jury find the defendant, John R.
Maloney guilty of first degree-- John Maloney was found guilty of first degree murder, arson, and mutilating a corpse.
John Maloney was found guilty of first degree murder, arson, and mutilating a corpse.
He was sentenced to life in prison.
I was very much, sort of, shocked by the outcome of my trial.
John Maloney continues to maintain his innocence.
I did not have anything to do with Sandy death.
I did not kill Sandy.
I'm scared of maybe spending the rest of my life in prison for something, a crime that I was convicted of and, and didn't do.
His son, Matt, refuses to believe that his father is a killer.
All evidence in the basement and upstairs point to an accidental death.
I mean, I loved my mom, but I just want everyone to know how my mom did really die and that my dad's not responsible for it.
But forensic science painted a picture of what actually happened in Sandy's home before the fire.
The autopsy serves as the voice of the dead, the silent witness to the crime.
Had the autopsy not disclosed what it disclosed about Sandy death, this could have been put down as an accidental death.
This case could not have been solved without the physical findings of the police investigators at the scene.
And without forensic evidence, we might have a killer still on the loose.
All of these forensic evidences are so important.
And we were just overwhelmed with the good job that the prosecution had done.
I think he's a coldblooded killer.
And high school sweetheart or not, he committed this crime.
The evidence was there.
He did it and he got caught, and now he's paying for it.
Residents of Noel, Missouri, were stunned to learn that their local bank had been robbed and its president was missing.
Investigators the searched a three-state area for possible clues.
On the bank of the lake outside of town, a fisherman found a used piece of tape.
Had he thrown it away, all hopes of solving the case would have vanished.
Because of its spelling, the town of Noel, Missouri, is known as the Christmas City.
And one October morning, Christmas came early for someone in town.
A bank employee arriving for work found the front door unlocked and the vault wide open.
A bank robbery in Noel was just the last thing that people would be thinking about.
It's nothing like you would see a large city.
Bank officials discovered more than $71,000 was missing.
The robbers also managed to haul away over $4,000 in wrapped coins.
On the floor of the bank, police found two spent .45 caliber shell casings left when the robber shot the lens of the security camera.
The area was dusted for fingerprints but none were found.
It was pretty obvious the perpetrators had been careful, either wearing gloves or just very careful not to leave or touch any portion of the bank that would leave a good fingerprint.
Only three employees could open the vault.
One was Dan Short, the bank president.
He was the one that had the access to both the bank front door and the vault.
It just be an obvious conclusion in some people's minds that he might have had something to do with it.
51-year-old Dan Short was well-liked and respected, but he had recently experienced some personal problems.
Dan Short's wife had left some 16 months prior to the time of the crime.
He did seem to be restless and uneasy.
Unsatisfied with way his life was going at that time, perhaps drinking too much.
Investigators couldn't locate Dan Short.
And his pickup truck was missing from his home.
There was an area where it looked like that the contents of his pickup had just been swept out onto the ground.
It appeared he had left in a hurry.
A wastebasket was overturned, dresser drawers were left open, and Dan's glasses were still on the bureau.
That would appear that there had been a struggle, because he never went anywhere without his glasses.
And there was another sign that Short may not have been a willing participant.
As president, Dan Short was aware of a hidden compartment in the bank vault that held an additional $100,000, but it hadn't been touched.
Police and volunteers searched the area for clues.
We checked every ravine, every canyon, all the woods and buildings, and everything that was out there.
A few hours later, police found Dan Short's truck two miles outside of town.
Loose coins were scattered around it.
We now have to wonder, well, how did he get somewhere else?
There has to be a second vehicle.
There has to be some other people who have removed him from there.
Investigators had no money, no witnesses, no forensic evidence, and no sign of Dan Short, meaning the perpetrators were either smart or lucky.
It didn't take long for news of the bank robbery to spread, since Noel only had about 1,000 residents.
Everybody was shocked.
That's all you could hear talked about at the cafes.
People were bunched up in little groups along the street talking about it.
Five days after the robbery, a fisherman on Grand Lake, 21 miles outside of town, saw a body floating in the water.
Lake, 21 miles outside of town, saw a body floating in the water.
It was Dan Short, the bank president.
He had been tied to a chair with duct tape, a cement block and a chain hoist had been attached to weigh it down.
But it wasn't enough to overcome the buoyancy caused by the body gases.
We now have the ultimate of crimes.
We have the taking of human life.
Mr. Short would have gladly given all the money in the bank, and traded it for his life.
But these individuals were not content with that.
The medical examiner found water in Short's lungs, meaning he was alive when thrown into the lake.
The general consensus was that the people who committed this crime were just really, really cruel, ugly bad people.
The taped used to bind Short to the chair was sent to the FBI for analysis.
Robert Webb used heat to carefully separate each piece.
Next, all of the pieces were tested to see if they came from the same roll.
The infrared spectrophotometer tells the chemical composition of the sticky glue in the duct tape, the fibers, and the plastic backing.
It tells me what kind of material it's made up of.
Tests revealed every piece of tape was the same brand.
The next step was like a puzzle, as Webb tried to piece together the entire 60-yard roll using what is known as end match analysis.
The pieces of duct tape were torn off the roll in all kinds of different lengths, from a very short six, seven inches long, to two and three feet long or more.
Starting from the very first piece of tape that was torn off the roll, I was able to tell the first piece of tape came from the left wrist.
The second piece of tape came from the right risks.
The third piece came from the mouth.
Then longer pieces of tape were torn off and wrapped around his chest, around his forearms, around his legs and thighs.
I was able to read full pieces of tape, and tell where every piece was applied, and in what order, so that he had no chance of getting away.
But there was one piece missing.
One piece of duct tape separated from all these other pieces when it was in the lake and floated away.
Investigators wondered where this piece of tape got to, and why it was missing from the chair.
News of Dan Short's murder generated numerous calls from concerned citizens.
Someone reported seeing a brown van parked on the bridge over Grand Lake on the night of the bank robbery.
Another caller overheard two brothers, Joe and Shannon Agofsky, talking about money.
From what I've heard of Shannon Agofsky, his bragging about being the richest teenager in the county or something like that-- In fact, they owned .45 caliber firearms.
In fact, they owned .45 caliber firearms.
They allowed the FBI agent to test fire those guns, and the casings were matched with the casings in the bank, and were found not to be the guns.
The Agofsky's family members said, the boys were home on the night of the robbery.
They were eliminated after being interviewed, and seemed cooperative, and had plausible alibis.
Police also learned that two convicted felons, Billy Ray Hankins and Larry Wayne Hankins were living in Noel at the time, but they both had solid alibis.
Billy Ray Hankins and Larry Wayne Hankins were living in Noel at the time, but they both had solid alibis.
They had robbed several banks.
And had never abducted anyone in the process, but robbed banks, and all kind of stuff.
But their mother testified for them as an alibi.
Police also questioned Dan Short's estranged wife, Joyce.
Short's estranged wife, Joyce.
Anytime you have an estranged family like this, and one of the individuals ends up missing or harmed, you know, one of the people you have to look at is his wife.
Joyce said she knew nothing about the crime and willingly agreed to take a polygraph test.
She passed.
Two different television programs profiled the case asking viewers with information to contact police.
Gerald Elkins played the role of Dan Short in the televised recreations.
Short in the televised recreations.
They actually held me over the bridge, and every time they started holding me over, I grabbed the railing.
I grabbed the railing.
And they said, Gerald, you have to let go the railing, and we want you to act scared.
And I said, well, that won't be any problem, because I was scared.
The programs generated hundreds of tips, but none proved helpful.
Investigators needed forensic evidence, because without it, the trail of the killers was turning cold fast.
With so little crime in Noel, Missouri, the discovery of Dan Short's body in Grand Lake took almost everyone in town by surprise.
My little boy came home from school one day and said, dad, they've got the bridge blocked off.
There's cops everywhere.
And so I look outside, and sure enough, they had the bridge blocked off investigating.
And I stood out on the deck of my porch, and watched all the activities.
When police left the area, Rowdy Foreman did a little investigating of his own.
Rowdy Foreman did a little investigating of his own.
Curiosity got the best of me.
We went back down to the shoreline.
We walked from east to west of the bank.
We come to this one single dock, fishing dock, and there was a strand of duct tape, which appeared to be turned halfway inside out.
Was this the missing piece of duct tape investigators were looking for?
Foreman knew not to touch the tape with his fingers, so he placed it into a bag with a stick.
When Mr. Foreman walked into my office that day with that piece of tape, it was too good to be true.
First words that came out of his mouth, oh, my god.
There were two, if not three latent fingerprints in this greasy, rusty residue.
The gentleman, he said, Jesus!
Jesus, can't believe it!
Investigators analyzed the tape to see if it was the one missing piece.
I was conclusively able to match that piece of duct tape by end-matching to the reconstructed roll of duct tape associated with the chair, and the chain, and the cinder block.
This was crucial, because without proof the tape was from the same roll, the fingerprints meant nothing.
FBI fingerprint examiner, Russell Davey could tell how the prints were left on the tape.
By grabbing the tape and pulling away from the roll, as can be seen, by tearing it away.
And then, there would be prints present on the end of the tape.
The fingerprints we're compared to those in the FBI database of past criminal offenders, and there was no match.
Several months later, there were rumors that two brothers, 18-year-old Shannon Agofsky and his 23-year-old brother, Joe , we're spending large amounts of money despite the fact that they were unemployed.
18-year-old Shannon Agofsky and his 23-year-old brother, Joe , we're spending large amounts of money despite the fact that they were unemployed.
Both had been suspects early on in the investigation, but had been cleared.
Joseph Agofsky paid for a trip to Disneyland for his honeymoon.
He paid for a wedding ring.
He paid to have a chainsaw souped up.
Something in in the neighborhood of $45,000 by both brothers a after the months-- or during the months following their robbery and murder.
And the witness identified the chain hoist found with Dan Short's body as the one he left at the Agofsky's home.
So the chain hoist led us back to the Adofskys.
At that point, we focused on the two brothers believing that they at least had knowledge of who the perpetrators were.
Or they were, in fact, involved themselves.
At that point, we didn't know which might be the case.
And there was another coincidence.
The Agofsky's mother owned a brown van similar to the one a witness saw on the Grand Lake bridge on the night of the murder.
And another man told police that he saw the Agofskys wiping their bullets clean before loading them into their guns.
This occurred several days before the robbery.
And their explanation for doing so was that if they ever got caught doing whatever they were going to do with the firearms and the ammunition, they wouldn't find fingerprints of theirs.
Was it possible that a pair of robbers careful enough to remove their fingerprints from bullet casings were careless enough to leave them on the piece of tape?
The prime suspects in the bank robbery and murder of Dan Short were two brothers, Joe and Shannon Agofsky.
There was no forensic evidence found at the bank, but investigators found two fingerprints on a piece of duct tape recovered at the lake where Short was murdered.
When asked, Joe Agofsky willingly agreed to provide his fingerprints.
His brother refused.
I had difficulty in obtaining those of Shannon.
I talked to him several times, and for one reason or the other, he couldn't provide them or would not provide them at that time.
When Joseph Agofsky's prints were received for comparison, I compared the latent prints on the tape from the shoreline with his.
I compared the latent prints on the tape from the shoreline with his.
And they were very, very close, but they were not identical.
I said if this Joseph Agofsky had a brother, it would be interesting to see his prints, because they are so close.
With this information, the FBI requested and received a court order for Shannon's fingerprints.
There was more than adequate number of ridge characteristics for me come to the conclusion that these prints from the tape were, indeed, left by the index and middle fingers Shannon Agofsky.
A suspect put his mark on one piece of duct tape.
And that one piece of duct tape was positively associated with an entire roll of duct tape that had been applied to a deceased person.
So the suspect could not deny he was involved in the case.
Prosecutors believe the Agofskys waited until Dan Short's dinner guest left that evening, then abducted him.
At the bank, Short opened the vault, but didn't tell them about the secret compartment, which held an additional $100,000.
Afterwards, the brothers abandoned Dan's truck, then tied him to a chair they had prepared beforehand with the cinder block and chains already attached.
The evidence shows the brothers used all 60 yards of duct tape.
And Shannon inadvertently left his fingerprints on the piece of tape used to secure Dan's ankles to the chair.
Dan's ankles to the chair.
At Grand Lake, the brothers threw Dan Short over the side of the bridge.
Dan Short over the side of the bridge.
When they threw Short into the lake, one of the chair's spindles broke, releasing the piece of duct tape from his ankle.
The lake's current carried this single piece of tape with Shannon Agofsky's fingerprints to the shore on the opposite side of the lake, where it was discovered five days later by a citizen volunteer.
The evidence, the duct tape, the fingerprints on the duct tape-- sometimes I just wonder what would have happened if nobody found it.
It would be kind of surprising in a way that something that had been underwater would have prints on it that long.
Knowing that Dan Short was alive before he was thrown over, and the callousness of the Agofsky brothers in sending that man to his death in that manner, has to stand out as the thing that I remember to this day.
Three years after the crime, Joe and Shannon Agofsky were tried and convicted of the bank robbery charges.
Both were sentenced to life in prison.
The brothers next court date was for Dan Short's murder.
By all accounts, the jury was mesmerized by the amount of information Robert Webb gleaned from the pieces of duct tape.
I had an opportunity to take the reconstructed roll of duct tape, string it all out in front of the judge and jury and walk down the whole role of tape, and tell the jury, and show the jury, the first piece that was ripped off went on an arm, and so forth.
And tell the story all the way down the full length of the tape.
Shannon Agofsky was convicted of Dan Short's murder and sentenced to an additional life term in prison.
Joe Agofsky's case ended in a mistrial.
Prosecutors chose not to retry him, since he was already serving a life sentence for the robbery.
Without the forensic evidence in this case, we would probably not have identified the Agofskys much less prove the case against them.
The fact they used duct tape may, in fact, have been one of the things they did they wished they had not done.
It tells me the sequence of events at the scene.
Even though I wasn't there, the evidence was.
At the scene of a homicide, forensic scientists found clues that painted a virtual portrait of the killer.
They knew he had a dog and a red carpet in his home.
And they even knew the kinds of trees and shrubs in his yard.
And he left behind an unusual cable tie and a dog collar that led police straight to the front door of one of England's most notorious killers.
After doing some Christmas shopping, 16-year-old old Leanne Tiernan decided not to take the bus home, but instead, to take a short cut through a wooded area in Leeds England known as Houghley Gill.
16-year-old old Leanne Tiernan decided not to take the bus home, but instead, to take a short cut through a wooded area in Leeds England known as Houghley Gill.
I had told her before not to go down there, especially when it was dark and dingy down there.
It's not so bad during the day but not on the nights-- might could be a bit not very nice.
When Leanne didn't arrive home as planned, her family went looking for her.
She may have fallen, possibly broken a leg.
Then I decided to call the police because there was no sign of her.
For days police scoured the area with no luck.
We searched 1,000 houses from top to bottom, but it didn't produce one piece of evidence that could link TO explain what had happened to this girl.
TO explain what had happened to this girl.
We'd found absolutely no evidence of anything connected to Leanne.
It was simply as if she'd vanished off the face of the earth.
Welcome to my talk show. [laughter] There was nothing at school that was a problem to her.
There was nothing at school that was a problem to her.
We couldn't find any boyfriend in the background that perhaps would have explained why she'd not come home.
From that point onwards, we structured the whole case as if it was a potential murder inquiry.
A television network broadcast a re-creation of Leanne's walk home.
In it, Leanne's sister wore the same outfit Leanne was wearing on the night she disappeared.
This broadcast generated one promising lead.
And one witness did talk to us about having seen a man in Houghley Gill on numerous occasions and told us that he had a black and tan small dog.
We traced 70 plus people who walked the dogs in that area.
And through a process of elimination, by showing the witness the dog walker and the dogs, we were able to eliminate all 70 plus.
I never gave up hope.
If I'd have given up hope, I'd have probably ended up dead meself at the time.
There was always a little niggle in the back of your mind, because you just don't know.
But you've got to give yourself-- self something to keep going by.
Nine months later, a pedestrian noticed a suspicious bundle of trash in a wooded area about 16 miles from where Leanne was last seen.
It was a girl's body, and it was the body of Leanne.
And the immediate feeling, at first is, total despair, and you want to be with them.
You want to be dead with them.
The worst possible outcome had now been realized.
This girl's body had been found.
She'd been murdered in the most brutal of ways.
Leanne's body was wrapped in nine large green plastic garbage bags and a bed cover.
Her clothes were the ones she was wearing on the day she disappeared.
But it was clear her body had just recently been bumped there.
At this stage, we're not looking at a great length of time that her body's been there.
So of course, the questions are where has she been up until now?
One would expect if a package like had been left for any length of time, the animals would have got to it, would have broken in, of they'd have smelt it.
That hadn't happened.
The bags were tied with twine, which was unusual in both color and design.
Normally, twine like this is made up of three strands twisted together.
This one was unusual in that it was four strands twisted together.
And so I had not seen that sort of thing before.
It wasn't a standard off-the-shelf product that you could buy at any garden center.
There was something very unique about this.
Leanne Tiernan had given police a valuable tool-- the trace evidence that could identify her killer.
After Leanne Tiernan's body was discovered in the woods, her family went on television to appeal to anyone who might have seen someone in the area where Leanne's body had been found.
Leanne was a lovely girl.
She was me baby.
She was me mate. [inaudible] Unfortunately, the appeal didn't generate any leads.
Unfortunately, the appeal didn't generate any leads.
But the autopsy answered some questions about where Leanne's body had been over the last several months.
It appeared to have deteriorated in a-- in a reverse way.
It seemed to be more decayed on the inside than the outside.
And that started us thinking in terms of, has she maybe been frozen?
Samples of Leanne's heart tissue were analyzed under a scanning electron microscope.
In the case of Leanne's tissue, there were large gaps, which, to me, were indicative of an ice crystal once having been present and forced the muscle bundles apart.
The size of these gaps indicated she probably had been kept in a home freezer.
If you freeze very quickly in a-- a material like liquid nitrogen, or liquid oxygen for example, the freezing rate is very, very fast, and the ice crystals are tiny.
If you freeze very slowly, for example, in a deep freeze, the cooling rate is much slower, and the ice crystals are very much larger.
And scientists found more telling evidence in Leanne's hair.
It was pollen.
Specifically, pollen from the Ligustrum vulgare, otherwise known as the Privet, which is a hedge plant.
Pollen from the Populus Fastigiata, a poplar tree, and Prunus domestica, which was from a plum tree.
There were also remnants of burnt wood, an indication she had been close to a bonfire.
The cause of death appeared to be strangulation.
There was a knotted scarf and a cable tie around her throat and cable ties around her wrists.
The printed lot numbers reveal the ties were standard issue, available through many retail outlets.
But one yellow tie yielded an important clue.
Its lot number showed it had been manufactured exclusively for the British postal system, which comprises the Royal Mail and the Parcelforce.
Useful information, but there are several thousand people who work for both companies.
So it wasn't going to provide us with a name.
The materials which covered Leanne's body.
She was wrapped in a duvet.
And she was also wrapped in a number of green plastic refuse sacks.
The duvet bed cover had a floral design, which had been manufactured for decades and was impossible to trace.
Scientists had better luck with the trash bags.
They were 40 microns thick-- a small piece of intelligence that identified them as a brand sold only through the Morrison grocery store chain.
There were two of these stores near Leanne's home.
Actually finding out who bought those bags w-- was just an impossible task.
But the main piece of information it helped give to us was that the killer's likely to be from the area where these supermarkets are located.
On the trash bags, bed cover, and Leanne's clothing were significant pieces of trace evidence-- tiny, red carpet fibers.
These were distinctively lobed fibers.
They were twisted in a particular way.
They were also dyed in a particular way in that they were more red at one end of twist than at the other.
There were also dozens of animal hairs, which appeared to be from a black and tan dog.
This was consistent with the information from the witness who saw a man with the same type of dog in the area where Leanne disappeared.
The killer used an unusual dog collar to wrap the garbage bags around Leanne's body.
Investigators now knew the killer had a dog, red carpet in his home, and worked for the postal service.
Now, all they had to do was find him.
The forensic evidence revealed Leanne's Tiernan's body had been frozen before it was dumped in the woods almost a year after she was murdered.
If the killer kept the body in his freezer, he probably lived alone.
There was further evidence that he lived near a privet hedge and a poplar tree, had red carpet in his home, and a dog.
And he most likely worked for the postal service, where he obtained the distinctive yellow cable ties.
The last item for scientists to analyze was the dog collar used to fasten the garbage bag over Leanne's head.
It did appear to be a very good quality dog collar.
And it did have some distinctive features about it-- that nature of the stitching, the thickness of the leather, the color of the leather.
Detective David Wilson was assigned the task of determining where the color came from.
Our first aim was to try and identify the dog color itself.
And then perhaps if we couldn't do that, move on to finding out where it had been sold and then who it had been sold to.
The color was manufactured by Armitages Pet Products in nearby Nottingham, England.
Products in nearby Nottingham, England.
Because the uhm, stitching process had become computerized in 1999, we were able to tell, straight away, that this collar was made between 1999 and 2001.
The manufacturer provided the names of more than 100 retailers who sold these colors during that time.
Each one was contacted to see if they had kept any customer records.
At that stage, it was trying to find a needle in a haystack.
But they didn't really keep records of people's names and addresses who had bought a dog collar.
They just sold a dog collar.
Uh, it wouldn't necessarily mean that they would have details uhm, of anybody within our area who had bought one.
On a hunch, Wilson asked for the names of customers who purchased the collar over the internet.
This gave them their first real break.
There were only three people from the auction and only one person from Leeds who appeared on that list.
This was a John Taylor of Cockshott Drive in Leeds, and he'd bought six of these dog collars.
John Taylor was 45 years old, divorced with two grown children, and was currently living alone just 3/4 of a mile from where Leanne disappeared.
And there was another startling revelation.
Taylor worked for a division of the Royal Mail with access to the yellow cable ties, like those found on Leanne's wrists.
According to his neighbors, Taylor was a loner who raised hunting dogs and had a dark side.
He was a man who led a very nocturnal life.
He'd go out at all times at night, poaching and hunting.
This was seemingly his supply of food.
We found that he had been cruel to animals, particularly in the killing process of animals.
Investigators also discovered that Taylor met women through Lonely Hearts newspaper ads.
We were checking telephone bills of his, and we found but he was making literally thousands upon thousands of calls to newspaper date lines.
And he'd met quite a number of uh, of-- of ladies and partners through this.
When we spoke to one female acquaintance in particular, she told us that he would like to take her up into his bedroom, that he would like to place a cable tie behind each of her wrists, and then tie that cable tie together, and then put a scarf over her face, and have quite violent sex with her.
Three cable ties tied together, one around each wrist, and one linking the two together, which was precisely the same way that he tied Leanne Tiernan up.
When police searched Taylor's home, they were surprised to see that there was no red carpet in his home, and he didn't have a black and tan dog.
Was it possible that John Taylor was the wrong man?
Police were convinced that John Taylor was involved in Leanne's Tiernan's murder.
But they needed forensic evidence to prove it.
We knew that we had to examine every single inch of his home, and his garden, and his sheds and his out buildings to find any evidence which could match to those items which had been found a Leanne's body.
The initial thing that struck us when we went in was that all the floorboards had been stripped.
And this made us think, where the carpets?
There were no carpets in John Taylor's house, but what he couldn't remove were the strands around the nails on the floorboards.
There were bare boards with the nails in that had been used to hold down the carpets.
Those carpet strands in Taylor's home were microscopically similar to the carpet fibers found with Leanne's body.
And on a loose nail in the kitchen, investigators found a tiny fragment of a trash bag, as if someone brushed up against the nail while carrying a bag.
The trash bag fragment was the same brand as the type found with Leanne's body.
We found two dog collars, which were identical to those ordered from Armitages.
In addition to that, we found an amount of twine.
And that was forensically examined, and found to be identical to that recovered from Leanne.
In the backyard, scientists found a broken cable tie identical to the one around Leanne's wrists.
And there was also a poplar tree and a privet hedge consistent with the pollen found in Leanne's hair.
When police excavated Taylor's yard, they made a gruesome discovery.
They found the corpse of a black and tan terrier.
We felt that Taylor had killed this dog as soon as he heard major appeals trying to identify that person, who he knew to be himself.
The hair from Taylor's dog was microscopically similar to the dog hair found with Leanne's body.
John Taylor was arrested and charged with Leanne's murder.
When confronted with the overwhelming forensic evidence, Taylor confessed.
Taylor confessed.
He admitted abducting Leanne as she walked along the wooded path and forcing her to a half mile back to his home.
Taylor used a distinctive cable tie from work to tie her wrists and at some point, he strangled her to death.
The ice crystals in Leanne's heart tissue showed Taylor stored her body in the freezer.
Almost nine months later, he covered the body with garbage bags and the bed cover, and fastened them with the black twine and the dog collar, which was traced to Taylor through his internet purchase.
There's no doubt in my mind that John Taylor set out to kill on that Sunday.
Leanne Tiernan was in the wrong place at the wrong time.
This man is a predator.
It could've been any woman, that afternoon, who fell into his hands.
She was subject to the most savage, brutal, and callous attack imaginable.
Although Taylor admitted the abduction, he insisted Leanne's death was an accident, claiming she had fallen and hit her head on the floor.
But this was a lie since the autopsy showed no such injury.
He couldn't explain how the girl had been strangled with a plastic cable tie and a double-knotted scarf.
He couldn't account for that at all.
Investigators find it hard to believe that Taylor left so much forensic evidence.
Pollen from his garden, carpet fibers, the distinctive cable tie, the twine, garbage bags, the hairs from the dog all bore Taylor's signature.
John Taylor's not as clever as he thought he was.
He didn't leave his DNA.
He didn't leave fingerprints.
But he left items there that led a trail back to him, and that was is own doing.
John Taylor was found guilty of kidnapping and murder and was sentenced to two life terms in prison.
14 years earlier, another woman had been sexually assaulted in the same area where Leanne's body was found.
The biological evidence from that case proved that John Taylor was the perpetrator.
For that crime, and one other to which Taylor confessed, he received two additional life sentences.
But no one is convinced that all of John Taylor's deadly secrets have been unearthed.
There are for murders that we're investigating in, in very great detail.
One of the cases actually involves a prostitute whose body was found buried in the same woods that Leanne was later found.
Without forensic evidence, Taylor would not have been implicated in any of these crimes.
Taylor would not have been implicated in any of these crimes.
I think what satisfied me most about this case was the fact that we weren't relying on very powerful DNA, or very powerful fingerprint evidence to identify an offender.
It was old-fashioned forensics, if you like.
It was fibers.
It was hairs.
It was uhm, the construction of various items, and all these things came together to provide some extremely powerful evidence.
A young college girl was driving alone late at night on a California freeway, and something went terribly wrong.
Investigators found several tiny clues.
But none was more telling than a single gold fiber, so rare that it could only have come from one source.
20 year old Cara Knott was a junior at San Diego State University.
She was a budding environmentalist and track star who was studying to become a teacher.
I can't tell you that I heard one thing about Cara that you would not have wanted your daughter to be like.
She helped animals.
She worked at the zoo.
She was just always active.
And she had this boyfriend who was just, I mean-- together they would've stopped traffic.
I mean-- together they would've stopped traffic.
Over the Christmas holidays, Cara's boyfriend Wayne Bautista was sick with the flu, so Cara drove to Escondido, California to see him.
Cara's boyfriend Wayne Bautista was sick with the flu, so Cara drove to Escondido, California to see him.
She called two or three times and asked me things about her-- nursing type things.
You know, the thermometer and-- I don't know, whatever.
She'd really never been in that role before.
Around 8:00 PM, Cara called her father to say she was on her way home.
But several hours passed, and Cara still had not arrived home.
It was about 10 o'clock, and Sam just suddenly had this horrible feeling.
And he said-- he kind of got up from his chair.
And he said, I'm going to go find Cara.
I mean, he physically felt it.
He said-- he called it later, a call to my soul.
Wayne Bautista told Cara's family he hadn't heard from her since she left, and he had no idea where she was.
He had no explanation.
I mean, he-- no more than the rest of us.
We were all just so puzzled.
Members of the Knott family searched for Cara along the nearby freeways and off ramps.
We just kept looking all night long.
I went through the phone book, calling the hospitals and the different police agencies between here and Escondido, and nobody knew anything.
At daybreak, Cara's family drove down the Mercy Road exit ramp off of interstate 15.
It was a dead end.
Underneath, it was dark and desolate.
I've even gone down there as an officer, and later as a supervisor to write reports and didn't stick around.
It was an eerie location.
We commonly refer to that area as the tomb, because of the way it appeared from underneath the roadway.
Underneath the main highway, hidden from view, was Cara's abandoned car.
The driver's side window was opened halfway.
The keys were still in the ignition, and Cara's purse was on the seat.
Investigators from the San Diego police department searched the entire area.
70 feet below a nearby bridge, they discovered what appeared to be a woman's body.
Cara's father Sam was at the scene, and he knew from the Sheriff's reaction that the news was bad.
Sam walked over to the officers, looked them in the eye, man to man, and said, did you find my daughter?
And the officers turned away and said, yes we did, and I'm sorry, she's dead.
Sam's response to that has always stuck with me.
What would a father say under those circumstances?
Sam's response was, I wish you could have known her.
She was an angel.
The murder of 20 year old Cara Knott was a complete mystery.
The motive wasn't obvious, because there didn't seem to be any rhyme or reason for her to even be in that location.
During Cara's autopsy, the medical examiner found no signs of sexual assault.
The cause of death was strangulation.
There were ligature marks around her neck and a mysterious bruise on her face.
The only evidence inside Cara's car was a receipt from a Chevron gas station, which was about 15 miles from the crime scene.
We went to that gas station, of course.
And we talked to the people.
They remembered her.
And there was absolutely nothing out of the ordinary.
She wasn't approached by anybody.
She filled her car up. She paid for it.
And she left by herself.
On the bridge near Cara's body, investigators found two suspicious skid marks.
I was unsure whether they were breaking skid or whether they were acceleration skid, but they were protected and measured very carefully and photographed extensively.
The distance between the marks was 53 inches, indicating a large vehicle.
Since it appeared that Cara drove off the highway willingly, investigators believe there must been a reason for doing that.
Whoever stopped this young lady, it had to be somebody she trusted.
And again, I suspect the boyfriend because she's not going to let anyone-- she's careful.
Cara's boyfriend, Wayne Bautista, was the last known person to see Cara alive.
He was a person of interest.
He had spent a considerable amount of time with her because he was ill, and she was up there taking care of him.
And we only had his word that she had left, and at what time she had left.
Bautista said he was home all night after Cara left, and his sister confirmed his alibi.
9:00 PM on Saturday, December 27th, Cara Knott telephoned her parents to tell them that she was on her way home.
In a search for information, police asked the local television station to feature Cara's story on their Crime Stoppers program.
The producers reenacted what they believed were Cara's last moments alive in the hope that someone had seen something and would come forward.
And Rory Devine, a local news reporter, joined forces with Craig Peyer, a California highway patrolman for a segment on driver safety.
Being a female, you could be raped.
Robbed if you're a male.
All the way to where you could be killed.
He said, if somebody should come up to your car and offer help, just ask them to call the CHP.
Don't get out of your car and walk up the freeway.
Because once you get in the car with someone, you are at their mercy.
The first lead in the case came from numerous telephone calls to police responding to their pleas for help.
There was about 300 calls made to Crime Stopper.
There was about 30 women who had been stopped, had been taken off down at Mercy Road, talked to, detained.
They all said that a California Highway patrolman instructed them to drive to the same deserted location where Cara was murdered.
Some said the patrolman sat in the passenger seat of their car and questioned them.
Several said the questions were inappropriate and sexual in nature.
The officer was 36 year old Craig Peyer, a veteran on the force.
Interestingly, this was the same patrolman who appeared on television telling them what to do to remain safe.
He had done stories with the media for years.
And he seemed so concerned.
And he seemed so upset about the fact that this young woman had been killed.
We both expressed how upset and how sad it was.
If there was a man who was more proud of being a CHP officer, I don't know that I've ever met him.
I don't know that I've ever met him.
Craig Peyer was working the night Cara was murdered, but his log book provided an alibi.
It showed he was miles away from the crime scene writing a traffic ticket at 9:30, the approximate time Cara Knott was killed.
I said, I don't think there's any way in the world Craig could have possibly committed this crime, but it still needs to be looked in to.
And look into it they did.
A week after Cara Knott's murder, authorities still had no real suspects.
But 30 different women called police to complain about a California Highway patrolman, Craig Peyer, who they say improperly stopped them along the same stretch of highway to interrogate them.
When Peyer was questioned, investigators noticed several suspicious marks on his face.
He had scratches on his forehead.
He had trauma to one arm.
It sounded like he had been in a fight.
Peyer said he accidentally fell against a fence at the police barracks on the same night Cara was killed.
The fence was higher than the level of the blacktop that his car was parked on, and it was about 10 feet away.
In our eyes, he would have had to take a running leap to hit his the face on the fence.
And a closer inspection of Peyer's logbook for the night of Cara's murder showed an erasure mark for the entry at 9:30, the suspected time frame of the murder.
What it meant to me was is that to make it look like he had something going on during that period of time.
And I still didn't believe, at this point, that he could have possibly committed that crime.
Craig Peyer denied any involvement in Cara's murder, and he willingly turned over the uniform he was wearing the night Cara was killed.
Interestingly, there was a golden edged shoulder patch on the uniform, which criminalist John Sims examined with a polarized light microscope.
The visual appearance of those gold fibers from the highway patrol patch was so distinguishable and memorable that I immediately remembered that there was something in the Cara Knott clothing that I had seen that looked just like that.
The single gold fiber that Simms found on Cara's sweatshirt was microscopically consistent with the gold fibers from Craig Peyer's shoulder patch.
Peyer's shoulder patch.
Now it's become a real sick, bad feeling.
This was my first bout with high blood pressure.
But simply because fibers and look the same doesn't mean they are the same.
So investigators sent the gold fibers to forensic microscopist, Skip Palenik.
Under high magnification, Palenik discovered both fibers were made of rayon, but it was something unusual.
The fibers had not been colored with a dye, but with a pigment, a relatively outdated process.
You hardly ever find rayon fibers, or acetate rayon fibers that are pigmented anymore.
It's just, it's just a process which simply isn't used.
Next, Palenik compared the color of the pigments in both fibers.
A tiny piece of each fiber was placed in a solvent, which separated the pigment from the fiber.
The pigment granules from both fibers were then studied with a spectrophotometer.
It sends light through the pigment to measure how much of it is absorbed and how much passes through.
It actually builds up a little chart that looks like a curve.
And what you physically really do when you're comparing two fibers, is to compare these two curves.
The fiber from Cara's sweat shirt and those taken from Peyer's shoulder patch were not just similar.
They were an exact match.
I hadn't seen fibers like that up to that point, and I haven't seen them since.
I produced three or four other jackets which the threads were compared with the patch that he wore.
And they were different.
To see a piece of evidence that was, in my eyes, from the microscope's eyes, a physical link between the victim and the suspect in this case, it was a scary feeling actually.
Purple fibers were found on Peyer's police boots and his gun.
When these fibers were tested in the same way as the gold fibers, they were found to be an exact match with fibers from Cara's sweat pants.
We had a cross transfer taking place.
We had some of Cara Knott's physical clothing material on Craig Peyer.
We had Craig Peyer's physical clothing material on Cara Knott.
Not a lot, because this contact was what I would call basically, a flash contact.
It was quick and it was over almost immediately.
Investigators sprayed luminol in the trunk of Peyer's police cruiser and found nothing, but they noticed a small piece of yellow rope underneath the spare tire.
Police asked forensic odontologist Skip Sperber to compare the rope from Peyer's police car to the ligature marks on Cara's neck.
On measuring the rope and finding there was a distance of 7/16 of an inch from the center of each coil to the next coil, and seeing the same distance on the coils on Miss Knott's neck, which were all 7/16 of an inch, that demonstrated to me that very likely that rope may have caused that injury.
Also, on Cara Knott's shoe, scientists found a tiny drop of blood.
And at the time of Miss Knott's death, we were not using DNA with any great amount.
And so at that time, we relied basically on blood time.
Tests revealed the blood was type AB, the rarest type in the United States.
It also happen to be officer Craig Peyer's blood type.
21 days after the murder of Cara Knott, Craig Peyer, a 13 year veteran of the California Highway Patrol was charged with first degree murder.
His exact statement was something very similar to, I'm not saying that I did this, and I didn't do this, but what would happen to me if I did do this?
I'm not saying that I did this, and I didn't do this, but what would happen to me if I did do this?
I remember just being stunned, in shock.
It was unbelievable.
You know, you've got to be mistaken.
Craig Peyer was once considered one of the California Highway Patrol's finest.
He wrote a lot of tickets.
He was considered a hot pencil.
He'd answer the radio on the first call.
You could count on him.
His whole life was the highway patrol.
He would shine his badge, crease his pants, and, and that was his identity.
It was a big part of who he was, perhaps the biggest part of who he was.
And clearly something went radically wrong.
There was an overwhelming amount of forensic evidence that tied him to Cara Knott's murder.
The skid marks found at the crime scene were 53 inches apart, the same width as the tires on Peyer's police car.
They proved to be precisely, and I mean precisely, the width of a police cruiser.
The size and shape of the bruises on Cara's face were similar to those caused by a police flashlight.
It was my hypothesis that he grabbed the flashlight at this point, swung it in a back hand fashion, which ended up with the bell of the flashlight hitting her on the forehead, and with the handle of the flashlight hitting her just on the cheekbone.
Prosecutors believe Craig Peyer first noticed Cara Knott at the Chevron station as she was pumping gas into her car.
Then he followed her along the highway until she was just a short distance away from his favorite interrogation spot.
Based on stories from other women, Peyer pulled over.
Prosecutors think Peyer turned his lights on and used his loudspeaker to tell Cara to follow him down the highway to the next exit.
Cara probably didn't know the area would be deserted.
And once there, Peyer may have tried to get into Cara's car, as he had done before with the other women, but Cara refused.
This may have resulted in Peyer demanding that Cara get out of her car.
At some point, Cara felt threatened and fought back, scratching Peyer's face.
Peyer struck Cara in the face with his flashlight, knocking her unconscious.
Now, realizing he had gone too far and that Cara would be able to identify and testify against him, Peyer took some rope from his trunk and strangled her.
It appeared that Peyer put Cara's body on the hood of his car to drive to the bridge so that her hair and clothing fibers wouldn't get inside.
But the fiber transfer had already occurred.
It was evidence that even a 70 foot fall couldn't dislodge.
That little, little piece of gold, which he could never know was being transferred between him and Cara Knott proved to be his undoing.
There's a lot of irony in that, that that fiber from that particular patch that was apparently so meaningful to him was what was found on her that, really, was instrumental in conviction.
Craig Peyer was convicted of first degree murder and was sentenced to 25 years in prison.
It's a major embarrassment to me that he wore the same uniform I did.
He had everything.
What an idiot.
What was he doing?
And those power games he was playing.
Peyer continues to maintain his innocence.
But when asked if he wanted the blood on Cara's boot tested using the latest in DNA technology, Peyer declined.
His iceberg that he's living on in planet Craig Peyer is very, very much shrinking.
And if he would give his DNA, that would be great.
He didn't want the blood tested.
And that tells us all I need to know about that.
An innocent man would have the blood tested.
In November of 2000, Cara's father Sam suffered a heart attack and died just a few yards from where Cara was killed.
Sam suffered a heart attack and died just a few yards from where Cara was killed.
He was tending the garden the Knott family created on that site.
I really believe that Sam wouldn't have chosen another place to die.
I think that's where his connection with Cara was.
A go-go go dancer in rural Ohio vanished without a trace, leaving investigators without a single clue as to her whereabouts.
The case went unsolved for 26 years, until a homemade box, tool mark analysis, and an old car provided hints to where she had gone.
The rolling farm country of Wayne County, Ohio was home to 19-year-old Janice Hartman.
Janice was a free spirit, and she was raised with two brothers, tomboy affect, I mean she would climb a tree with the best of us.
And as with most teenagers, she had a boyfriend, 19-year-old John Smith.
He is kind of a nerdy, Howdy Doody looking guy, a person you would forget right away after you met him.
The two were inseparable, and both had a rebellious streak.
And he rode a motorcyclist at the time.
And she was that type of person that wanted to be on a fast item whenever it was.
When they finished high school, Janice and John got married, but the union didn't last long, and four years later they divorced.
To support herself, Janice took a job at a local nightclub as a go-go dancer.
I think it was more of that free spirit, again, coming back out in her.
That's the way she was.
Music was part of her life.
Her family was very uneasy with this.
And she said, hey, come on down to the bar and see me dance.
She didn't take all her clothes off.
One night after work, she was invited to a private party.
Janice told friends later there was heavy drinking at the party and also drugs.
Several men asked Janice to dance.
And at some point, things got out of control.
She was drunk.
These other guys appeared to be drunk.
Some of the gentlemen at this party attempted to rape her, attempted to sexually assault her, became very abusive.
Eventually, Janice talked her way out of the situation and left.
She immediately filed a formal complaint.
She went directly to the police department at the time, and told them the whole story, took statements, and the whole nine yards, everything she needed to do, and then she needed protection.
Janice returned to the nightclub and go-go dancing, but what happened at the party haunted her.
She went over to my mom's a couple of nights after that whole situation happened, and she mentioned to my sister that, hey, I'm going away for a while.
I'm going away for a while.
I'll be gone, don't worry.
And with that, Janice disappeared without taking her clothes or her car.
If you're going to leave the area, you're going to need things to go with.
You're going to need your clothing.
You're going to need the means of transportation.
Police interviewed the men who allegedly assaulted Janice at the party.
They admitted the situation had gotten out of hand.
But they said, they had no idea where Janice was.
Because of her lifestyle, this bar-hopping go-go dancer disappears one day just a few days after she was nearly raped by a bunch of guys.
Police, I think, assumed that she just led this dangerous lifestyle, and it finally caught up with her.
And for the next 26 years, no one saw or heard anything more from Janice Hartman.
Dennis Hartman disappeared just days after several men tried to rape her at a party.
At first, investigators assumed her disappearance was somehow related to the incident.
Here's a young, troubled girl who's in her early 20s who's hanging out with a bunch of questionable people, probably smoking some marijuana, having a good time.
She probably ran away for a while.
The case eventually turned cold.
And after years with no further information, the Hartman family gradually accepted the idea that they would never see Janice again.
When there's someone missing, you always have this hole.
I'm telling you, it's like a hole in your heart.
You'll have it.
It's never filled.
20 long years passed.
Then everything changed with one telephone call.
It was from a woman who called Garry asking for his sister, Janice.
I sat down on the edge of the bed and took the phone call, and I'm saying, yes, I'm Janice's brother.
And I said, I understand your sister was married to John Smith.
And I said, yes, she was married to John Smith, but she's missing.
And I said, well, our sisters have one thing in common.
They were both married to John Smith, and I said my sister's missing.
Garry Hartman's reply was, my god lady, you got a problem, my sister's been missing since November of '74, never to be heard from again.
Sherrie, the woman who called, said her sister 49-year-old Betty Fran had been married to John Smith for only a few months, and Smith had lied to Betty and her family about his past.
He presented himself as a 40-year-old Mennonite bachelor, never been married, a degree in aeronautical engineering from Ohio State University with a specialization in jet propulsion.
None of that turned out to be true.
This was the turning point.
What are the odds?
What are the odds that one wife would disappear under suspicious circumstances, then a second wife would disappear under suspicious circumstances, that they would both disappear with almost the exact same circumstances?
John Smith denied any involvement in Betty Fran's disappearance.
John's initial report was that he came home from work, and his wife had left and there was a very brief letter, which said she had gone out and please don't forget to feed the fish.
Smith denied having anything to do with his first wife's disappearance, too.
The FBI's Cold Case Unit got involved and discovered an interesting coincidence in the Missing Persons Reports.
20 years earlier, witnesses told investigators that they saw John Smith in the club watching his first wife dance on the night she disappeared.
John was not the type of person who would want his wife, or even his ex-wife, to be dancing in a skimpy outfit at a bar in front of men.
Another witness saw Smith and Janice leave together at closing time.
The divorce was final.
John was still trying to win her back.
She was dating other men, so this was like a pot that was just boiling, and boiling, and boiling.
Janice's family long suspected John Smith was somehow involved in her disappearance.
Smith had a temper and had been abusive towards Janice during their marriage.
I was playing a game of chess with him one day.
I nailed him with a checkmate.
And he just looked at the board, took his arm, slammed it across the chessboard, all the pieces just scattered all over the room.
And I was awed.
I just sort of sat back.
I was thinking, whoa, what's coming next?
Investigators had plenty of suspicion but no hard evidence.
All they knew was that Smith was the last known person to see both Janice Hartman and Betty Fran before they disappeared. -Dead in the water.
Fran before they disappeared. -Dead in the water.
I mean, we've got no leads.
It's exhausted and short of an accidental discovery or him confessing.
We've got nothing.
It was an astounding coincidence that John Smith's first and second wives both disappeared without trace.
In looking into Smith's background, investigators discovered that Smith had a younger brother, Michael, and they decided to pay Michael a visit.
Michael, and they decided to pay Michael a visit.
At first, Michael was unwilling to answer their questions.
After that interview, Michael went home and talked to his wife.
He searched his soul.
Michael had had a secret, and it had been eating at him for years.
And he searched his conscience, and he decided that he was going to turn on his brother.
Michael told the FBI a horrifying tale.
He said shortly after his brother's first wife, Janice, disappeared, he saw John building a wooden box in his grandparents' garage.
He thought that the shape was odd.
It had an odd dimension to it.
It was about four foot in length, but it was rather short.
John said he would use the box to store Janice's belongings.
Michael found this very perplexing and didn't know what to think of it.
And why was he building a box to put her clothing in?
If you're going to build a box to store things, you need to build it deep, like a chest.
And John became angry with his brother at this time, so Michael left the garage, went back into the grandparents' home.
Later that night, Michael went back out to the garage and looked through the window.
John is now packing clothing items into that box, which was completed.
Michael thought it was odd how he was packing.
He was taking the clothing, and rolling it up, and laying it along the outside edges of that box.
His brother was crying during the time he was packing these clothing items.
The box was nailed shut and stored in their grandparents' garage.
Five years later, when Michael and his grandfather were cleaning the garage, they pried the box open and looked inside.
Michael saw something that he would never forget for the rest of his life.
Looking up at him was the face of Janice Hartman.
And this corpse had the legs cut off below the knees.
Michael and his grandfather closed the box and immediately called John, who insisted he had nothing to do with Janice's death.
He said someone else killed her, and he was hiding the body because he thought he would be blamed.
Michael said John put the coffin in his black Corvette and drove away.
He never saw it again, and he said nothing about it for years.
He thought, my god, I might be an accomplice to murder.
I don't want to get in trouble for this, so he just didn't say anything.
It's not neat, and it doesn't speak well for Michael, but it's the truth.
But where was the wooden box now 21 years later?
Investigators learned that John Smith's stepfather was pouring the concrete foundation in an apartment complex around the time John removed the box.
Ground penetrating radar found a potential grave underneath the garage floor.
The highway construction people, actually using giant saws, removed a portion of the garage floor and then with excavation materials were removed and screened by the FBI evidence response team.
But they found nothing.
Investigators contacted every law enforcement agency and coroner in the state asking if they knew anything about a wooden box with a body inside missing the legs.
And they got a break.
The officer who got that letter had been on the force for 25 years or more, and it was just the best bit of luck we could have ever hoped for that he would have been the person who got the letter.
Because he immediately remembered the lady in the box from April of 1980.
10 years earlier, a highway worker found human remains in a wooden box in some deep brush along the side of the road.
She's a Jane Doe.
They didn't have the DNA technology that we have now.
There's no database they could go to.
There were no fingerprints that they could look up.
So they didn't have the kind of forensic capabilities that they have now.
So they just buried her in a pauper's grave, and hope for the best.
But authorities kept the box, as well as the nightgown that covered the victim's face.
And on the nightgown was a clue.
I could see her face in the dress.
It was like looking at Jan like she was there with us.
It was chilling to see it.
The image that is shown on that nightgown to this day is just a very unnerving image.
After all this time, was it possible that forensic science could identify the remains and also expose her killer?
Authorities in Indiana exhumed the remains of the unidentified woman they had buried a decade earlier.
The bones were taken to forensic anthropologists, Frank and Julie Saul.
When we did the x-rays, we determined that we were dealing with someone in early 20s.
The pelvic bones indicated it was a female.
By measuring the femur, Dr. Saul determined she was approximately 5'4" tall, the same height as Janice Hartman.
The skull was in almost perfect condition showing no signs of trauma.
Unfortunately, there were no dental records of Janice Hartman for comparison.
The smile was consistent with Janice Hartman, but we needed to do a more thorough job of establishing a positive identity.
The anthropologists noted the woman's legs had been amputated below knee after death.
To find out more, they sent the leg bones to forensic anthropologist, Steve Symes.
I am more specialized in that I work in the more modern samples of anthropology or forensic anthropology.
And within that, I have a specialty of bone trauma.
Dr. Symes noticed several false starts on the bones, which allowed him to see both sides of the instrument used.
Handsaws have teeth, which ultimately bend to the right and left, making a W-shaped cut.
The teeth cut a swath through the bones that's wider than the rest of the blade.
But the instrument used to cut these bones made a V-shaped cut, jagged on one side and smooth on the other.
It has teeth on one side and it's a fairly good description of a serrated knife.
It would take a lot of strength to actually do that or, what I would say, is a lot of motivation.
A bone fragment was sent to the FBI lab in Washington, DC for Mitochondrial DNA analysis.
When compared with the mitochondrial DNA from Janice Hartman's mother, it was a match.
Hartman's mother, it was a match.
The body was Janice Hartman.
I don't know what kind of human being can do something like that.
He's a sick man.
Sociopath was the term that I heard used more than once.
Investigators searched motor vehicle records and discovered that John Smith's old Corvette sports car was now in the possession of a car collector in New Jersey who had kept it in pristine condition.
Measurements revealed Janice's coffin could have easily fit inside the car.
And there was other evidence.
The FBI agent noted scratches on the dash as well as the rear window of that Corvette, which would be consistent with the edges of a box that size being placed in the vehicle.
26 years after Janice Hartman disappeared, John Smith was arrested and charged with first degree murder.
John Smith was arrested and charged with first degree murder.
Prosecutors believe Smith was angry that Janice divorced him.
And that he also objected to her work as a dancer.
Smith heard about the incident at the party Janice attended.
And he used this as his cover for murder.
Witnesses saw Smith leave the nightclub with Janice on the night she disappeared.
Prosecutors think Smith strangled Janice to death later that night.
I think that the legs being severed from Janice's body was symbolic in that she had walked out on John Smith.
For a controlling man, he could not handle that.
He made sure she would never walk away from him again.
Smith built the coffin in his grandfather's garage and buried Janice with her nightgown over her face.
He stored the coffin in his grandfather's garage until family members told him to remove it.
Then he put it in his sports car and dumped it in the weeds along an Indiana highway.
Based on the evidence, John Smith was convicted of Janice Hartman's murder, and he was sentenced to 15 years to life in prison.
These weren't just a pile of bones.
Science was able to give these bones a name and relatives who loved her.
They were able to give these bones an identity.
They were able to bring this case to life, and that's why they got a conviction.
Michael Fleeman wrote a book about this case, The Stranger in My Bed, and he doubts anyone will find Smith's second wife, Betty Fran.
The Stranger in My Bed, and he doubts anyone will find Smith's second wife, Betty Fran.
John Smith is not going to tell them where Betty Fran's body is if he is the one, in fact, who is responsible for this.
That would be a step in the right direction, and that would probably get him a conference with God before he would be sent to hell.
To do that means facing execution, and it's just not going to happen.
I don't think Betty Fran's ever going to be found.
And I don't think her case is ever going to be finally solved.
Investigators found evidence that Betty Fran was about to leave Smith, because she learned he was having an affair with another woman.
In my opinion, that is a good portion of John's problem is abandonment.
If a woman is going to leave him, it's nah, I control when you leave.
I control when you leave.
For over a decade, suspicious fires burned businesses and homes in Southern California.
Arson was suspected, but there was little physical evidence.
Investigators found an important piece of evidence in a novel that described several fires strikingly similar to the real ones.
How was it possible that the author knew information never revealed to the public?
South Pasadena, California, a town of only three square miles located just north of Hollywood.
On the night of October 10, 1984, most residents were getting ready to watch the San Diego Padres take on the Detroit Tigers in the World Series.
Padres take on the Detroit Tigers in the World Series.
Jim Obdam, just 19 years old at the time, was working as a cashier at Ole's Home Center.
And I was like, why is it so quiet in here?
I go, oh, yeah.
It's the World Series this evening.
I was thinking that it was nice and quiet in the store.
Around 7:00 PM, Obdam heard an emergency announcement over the public address system.
He went to investigate.
I was walking toward the front of the store and I noticed a pillar of smoke, just a grayish, white pillar of smoke.
Obdam went to the hardware department and began to lead customers toward the front of the store.
I looked down one of the side aisles, even turned down the side aisle, and noticed at that point in time that there was just a wall of flames.
I felt trapped and I didn't know where to go from there.
Then, the lights went out, and Obdam couldn't see the others.
Everyone inside the store desperately tried to find a fire exit.
The first unit to arrive at Ole's observed a column of smoke coming from the roof area.
The chief in charge was not certain at that time what they had.
He didn't realize the extent of the conflagration.
Within a very short period of time, the fire was a roaring inferno.
Jim Obdam barely got out alive.
My ears were singed.
The left arm was burnt.
As soon as I got out of the store, I still remember touching my arm and the skin just falling off of it.
I still remember touching my arm and the skin just falling off of it.
Four others were not so fortunate.
He was trapped in there.
He was dead.
Your son?
Your grandson? -My grand baby.
He would have been three in January.
Matthew Troidl was the youngest victim.
His grandmother, Ada Deal, and two store employees, Jimmy Cetina and Caroline Kraus, also perished.
Cetina and Caroline Kraus, also perished.
When the fire was extinguished, investigators searched through the rubble for clues.
Just in normal fire investigation, you have to first discover the area of the point of origin.
You can't find out what caused the fire unless you can find out where the fire started.
But investigators couldn't determine the origin.
When one goes to the scene of an arson fire, one finds-- essentially, a pile of trash.
Three feet of water sometimes.
And it's extremely hard to find the point of origin.
The official explanation was that the fire was accidental.
But John Orr, arson investigator for the nearby Glendale Fire Department, strongly disagreed.
Department, strongly disagreed.
He was at the fire and took these photos.
Within a day of fire, John Orr met with Karen Berry, who was the sister-in-law of one of the terms of fire, and he expressed his opinion that this, in fact, was an arson fire.
Orr believed the fire started in some patio cushions which were made of polyurethane foam, a highly flammable petroleum byproduct.
The debate didn't last long.
Soon, there would be other fires.
There was no doubt an arsonist was on the loose.
Two months after the fire at Ole's Home Center there was another suspicious fire at a second Ole's store.
This time, there was no dispute-- the cause was arson.
The fire was set in the foam padding section of the home products department.
And 90 miles away, there were several other suspicious fires in Bakersfield, California.
One of the fires occurred at a Craft Mart store.
Arson investigator Marvin Casey arrived at the scene shortly after it was extinguished.
Craft Mart is where they sell different crafts.
They sell foam rubber batting and dry vegetation for making floral arrangements.
And at this fire, investigators found their first real piece of evidence in a bin of dried flowers.
I looked in the bin and I saw a yellow-lined piece of paper that was used to conceal an incendiary device.
It was readily recognizable because it had three matches that were wrapped around a, uh, cigarette butt.
And it was attached with a rubber band.
The incendiary device burns slowly, allowing the arsonist time to make a getaway.
The burning cigarette will come down and it will ignite the sulfur on the end of the match head.
You instantly have a going flame.
And there was another fire that same day in a nearby fabric store that started in a bin holding pillows and foam rubber.
It doesn't take a rocket scientist to figure out that you have a problem with, uh, a fire bug on the loose.
There were other suspicious fires in Fresno and Tulare, cities north of Bakersfield.
At one, investigators found an incendiary device identical to the one found at the Craft Mart fire.
When Casey reviewed the dates and times of these fires, he discovered a troubling coincidence.
They all occurred along Highway 99 around the time a group of arson investigators met for their annual convention in Fresno.
So that just threw up a red flag in my mind thinking that it could possibly be one of our own setting fires.
Casey got the list of the 300 people who attended the conference and narrowed it down to 55 people based on where they lived in relation to the convention center.
What these 55 people had in common was that they had attended the conference.
They had traveled alone.
They had passed through Bakersfield down 99.
When Casey told his superiors that one of these 55 arson professionals was their serial arsonist, he was ignored.
I was an outcast.
I was shunned for developing this theory of a fire investigator setting fires.
Nobody but nobody that I know of believed that Casey was on to anything.
As a matter of fact, when I would attend the conventions, uh, I-- I couldn't talk to anybody about this theory very much, because nobody would really want to listen , and nobody shared my idea with it.
But maybe they should have.
The incendiary device from the Craft Mart fire was sent to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms for analysis.
It was a yellow piece of lined paper folded neatly with a cigarette and some matches inside.
ATF's fingerprint expert selected ninhydrin to look for possible prints.
Ninhydrin is a wet chemical that when applied to the paper actually reacts to the amino acids which are part of what makes up a fingerprint, uh, residue.
It usually takes a day for the chemical to dry, but heating the circulating air speeds up the process.
Miraculously, they found a partial print.
Fingerprints are referred to as just a chance impression.
They may be there, they may not.
So to find a fingerprint, especially to find one that was identifiable, the examiners as well as the investigators were very lucky in this case.
The color of the paper and the lines obscured the print.
To bring out additional detail, criminalists photographed it with a special filter.
The filters would then enhance not only the print, but the ridge detail that makes up the pattern.
And then also with the filters, it would eliminate any of the background colors so that the pattern can be seen more clearly.
The print was entered into AFIS, the Automated Fingerprint Identification System, containing prints of convicted criminals.
Fingerprint Identification System, containing prints of convicted criminals.
Unfortunately, the print did not match any in the database of known criminal offenders.
Marvin Casey then asked the ATF to compare the print to the 55 individuals on his list of people who attended the arson convention near the fires, but that request was denied.
They felt like that was too many names to submit to the different departments to get their fingerprint cards to analyze.
Casey's investigation had come to a dead end.
Then, two years later, there was another rash of store fires, this time in cities along Highway 101.
When Casey examined the dates of the fires, he discovered that they also coincided with a nearby convention of arson investigators.
And on that list of attendees were 10 individuals who had also attended the earlier arson conference.
I was quite excited.
Now I felt like we have something we can work with.
And he persuaded ATF to take these 10 names to their lab, surreptitiously obtain fingerprint impressions, and compare them to the print that he'd found, and could not come back with a positive finding.
But they could find no match.
Casey couldn't believe it.
And I was kind of discouraged, too.
Because I just felt like that-- that we're going to get somewhere with these 10 names off-- off of this list.
Another two years past.
Then, the arsonist struck again in Los Angeles, setting fires in dozens of stores throughout the area and causing millions of dollars in damages.
ATF Special Agent Mike Matassa headed the investigation.
The MO was to start fires in retail businesses, midday hours, primarily during open business.
Matassa heard about Marvin Casey's controversial theory that these fires were started by an arson investigator.
And he also learned about the fingerprint on the incendiary device.
So Matassa asked the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Office to analyze the print.
Sheriff's Office to analyze the print.
They compared it to their fingerprint database of everyone who had ever applied there for a job, and they found a match.
I was blown away.
I couldn't believe it.
The print matched the left ring finger of John Leonard Orr, an arson investigator with the Glendale California Fire Department.
John Orr wanted to be a Los Angeles Police officer for a long time.
Police officer for a long time.
He applied in 1981.
He passed all of the tests except one.
It was a psychological test.
Orr then applied for a job with the Los Angeles Fire Department but failed the physical part of the training.
He wasn't in good enough shape.
And that was a crushing disappointment in his life.
Eventually, he worked odd jobs until finally getting a job with the Glendale Fire Department.
It was the lowest-paying fire department in the Los Angeles area.
And he quickly rose through the ranks and became an arson investigator.
And eventually, a captain.
Orr was 1 of the 10 people on Casey's list who had intended both arson conventions.
The earlier fingerprint comparison had simply missed it.
The print linked Orr to only one of the fires.
Rather than arrest him on one fire with minimal damage that probably would have a very minimal sentence associated with it, we decided to investigate and try to tie him into all of the fires that had the same MO.
And for that, they turned to the latest in surveillance technology.
After a seven-year search for the serial arsonist, California investigators finally had a suspect.
California investigators finally had a suspect.
But the evidence against John Orr, a partial fingerprint, linked him to only one of the fires.
So investigators decided to track Orr's whereabouts by planting a device on his car called a Teletrac.
The tracking device itself is about the size of a videotape.
It can be installed anywhere in the car.
The Teletrac system uses a network of communication towers which transmit signals to the wireless device mounted in the car.
In some ways, it's better than ground satellite systems.
The one disadvantage of GPS is that if you're in a garage, or if the antenna is blocked from seeing the sky, it's very hard to get a good location.
With this technology, we don't need to see the sky.
On November 22, 1991, at 3:30 PM, the Teletrac placed Orr near the Warner Brothers Studio in Burbank, where a fire broke out on the set of a television show.
Interestingly, Orr immediately drove home, then received the official dispatch from headquarters.
The dispatcher inadvertently gave the wrong address for the fire.
We can watch him on the Teletrac device leave his house, drive to the first fire location, which was misidentified in the dispatch.
But yet, he makes it to the right location.
And with that information, we couldn't tie him directly to the cause of that fire, but we knew that we couldn't allow him to be on the street any longer.
With a warrant, investigators searched Orr's home.
We found in his briefcase cigarettes, matches, rubber bands, the type of materials that were used in the device.
And we found yellow lined paper in his car Orr denied that there was anything sinister about the materials.
Orr denied that there was anything sinister about the materials.
And also denied it was his fingerprint on the incendiary device found at one of the fires.
I've never set an arson fire, except in my training exercises.
And investigators found evidence that Orr planned some of the fires long before they happened.
On a home video found among Orr's things was a close-up of a beautiful Hillside home in California.
There's footage of the same house 18 months later on fire.
He had what we would call before and after shots of the fire, and shots actually as the fire was being perpetrated before any fire companies could arrive.
Other people said that he photographed the fires so that he could relive the event.
For the same reason that serial killers photographic victims, so that they can look at them later and relive the events.
Also confiscated from Orr's home was a manuscript for a book he had written.
It was about a fictitious firefighter turned arsonist, Aaron Stiles.
The similarities between the book and the real crimes were far too coincidental.
The Stiles character used delayed devices to set fires in retail stores while on his way to and from arson conferences.
He discussed how he set multiple fires at the same time in order to distract firefighting personnel to one location to the other, so he could sit and watch one of the other fires become rather large.
And the book describes a fire at a Cal's Hardware store similar to the fire in South Pasadena that killed four people.
Pasadena that killed four people.
In the novel, one of the dead victims was a young boy named Matthew, the same name of the two-year-old who died in the real fire.
It wasn't his fault, just stupid people acting as stupid people do."
Joseph Wambaugh wrote a book about this case called "Fire Lover."
I think John Orr does a better job than anyone in describing the psyche of the organized serial arsonist.
The power, the excitement, the thrill that motivates these people.
John Orr was charged with numerous counts of arson and for the murder of the four victims of the Ole's fire.
We, the jury in the above entitled case, find the defendant, John Leonard Orr, guilty of the crime of first-degree murder in violation of-- He was sentenced to life in prison without parole.
He was sentenced to life in prison without parole.
For the 10 years prior to John's arrest, there were an average of 67 brush fires per year in the hills above Glendale, Burbank, Pasadena-- major fires.
Pasadena-- major fires.
And after John's arrest, the average number of fires in that same area dropped from 67 to 1.
Well, it's my opinion that he set in excess of 2,000 fires over a period of about 30 years.
John Orr is believed to be one of the 20th century's most prolific arsonists, his long career brought to an end by a scrap of charred paper and the relentless work of investigators.
A car accident left one person dead, and a family in mourning.
At first, it looked like the driver's of alcohol consumption was the cause, but a closer look revealed a common weed found in an uncommon place-- leading investigators to wonder, was it really an accident?
Peter and Patty Wlasiuk lived in the small town of Guilford, in upstate New York.
Guilford's a beautiful, quiet community, it's a historic community.
Just a small hamlet.
They have the lakes, their main attraction, a beautiful lake, has a lot of summer homes on it.
We have a lot of hunting land for deer hunting.
The Wlasiuks were well liked in Guilford.
Peter owned one of the local bar.
Patty worked as a nurse at the local hospital.
She got a lot of joy from that.
It gave her a great sense of worth.
The only trouble spot seemed to be several citations Patty received for driving while intoxicated.
Patty received for driving while intoxicated.
On a scale of 1 to 10, she would be a 9.
I mean, her one downfall, her one flaw, was alcoholism.
And that's it, other than that, she was perfect.
She did her fair share of partying, and she did have her problems.
But she was big enough, and a strong enough person to try to persevere from them by going to school, and getting her, you know, degree.
On April 3, 2002, Patty worked the hospital's 3 to 11 shift.
When she came home, Peter was there, but the children were not.
Where are the kids?
Somehow, that night, my wife neglected, or forgot to pick up our children at the babysitter.
He described it as being a mistake, or miscommunication.
Obviously, when she got there, she thought that Mr. Wlasiuk was going to pick them up.
He thought she was.
They got into their truck, and headed for the babysitter's house.
Along the way, Patty tried to throw her cigarette out of the window.
The cigarette had come back into the cab of the truck.
Both of their attention was distracted towards the window, where the cigarette should have went.
When they looked up, there was a deer in the road.
Patty swerved, lost control of the truck, and plunged into the lake.
Peter said he was unable to get his wife out of the truck.
I-- I can't hold onto her.
A lot of days, I wish I'd been a lot stronger.
I wish I could have got her up to the top.
Peter ran to a nearby home for helpful.
Divers pulled Patty's body from the bottom of the freezing cold lake, and she was rushed by ambulance to the same hospital where she worked.
But doctors were unable to resuscitate her.
I didn't want to live anymore, myself.
I couldn't picture going on anymore in life without her, I couldn't-- and there's reasons, you know, that-- I like to think it was either her or God speaking to me that, you know, I didn't go further with what I was planning, of joining her.
I couldn't-- and there's reasons, you know, that-- I like to think it was either her or God speaking to me that, you know, I didn't go further with what I was planning, of joining her.
I like to think it was either her or God speaking to me that, you know, I didn't go further with what I was planning, of joining her.
Toxicology tests showed Patty had a blood alcohol level of 0.05, which was under the legal limit.
Patty had a blood alcohol level of 0.05, which was under the legal limit.
She had imbibed some alcoholic beverages.
And for a woman of her size, probably two or three drinks in the previous hour or two.
As with most fatal accidents, local officials conducted an accident investigation, which raised more questions that it answered.
Dr. James Terzian performed the autopsy on 35-year-old Patty Wlasiuk, the day after the fatal accident.
Wlasiuk, the day after the fatal accident.
She had a number of abrasions, and contusions-- which are scrapes and-- and bruises-- on the face, on the under surface of the upper lip, on the shoulder regions.
Those were the superficial injuries.
She also had petechial hemorrhages, or microhemorrhages on the surfaces of her lungs.
These hemorrhages can result from drowning, but there was very little water in Patty's lungs.
One does not have to have water in the lungs to drown.
And it's possible to have water in the lungs after one has been deceased, and placed in water.
Lab tests confirmed that Patty had been drinking.
In his preliminary report, Dr. Terzian identified the cause of death as probable drowning.
I'm left with minor cutaneous injuries, abrasions, and contusions, and a person pulled out of water.
So that's a drowning until proved otherwise.
There was one other finding.
For some unexplained reason, there were seed pods in Patty's hair, and on her clothing.
The pods were from a common weed, called burdock.
They have these little hooks on 'em, which stick to animals, or people.
And they travel around, and then usually get dumped somewhere, and so the plant gets distributed around that way.
I It finds new waste places to grow.
At the accident scene, investigators found the truck took an unusual route into the water.
Most of the lake is covered by home fronts, with garages, and houses.
And then the area that doesn't have houses or garages or residents has-- has guardrails, to prevent somebody going into the lake.
The truck veered into the lake at one of the few places where there was an unobstructed path from the road to the lake.
And investigators found no traces of deer in the area.
It's not one where you would generally expect to find a deer.
And had they swerved for a deer, you would expect to see some sort of evidence of that braking, swerving, skidding tires.
You know, anything like that.
There were tire impressions from Patty's truck on the shoulder of the right-hand lane, and tire impressions on the opposite side of the road, in the grass.
Accident investigator, Richard Cobb, connected these impressions, plotted the angle of the turn, and then estimate the speed of the vehicle using a standardized formula.
It's called the Critical Curve Speed Formula.
It takes into account the grade of the road, the drag factor of the roadway surface, and also the path of the vehicle-- meaning the arc that it turned, where you can figure out a speed at which the vehicle either would have been able to make the turn, or would-- would have lost control making that turn.
V equals velocity.
G is for gravity, which is a constant, 32.2.
R is for the radius of the R of the curve.
And the Greek letter mu is for the coefficient of friction, or the drag factor of the road surface.
This formula revealed that the speed of the Wlasiuk's truck was less than 30 miles per hour, considerably slower than what Peter described.
Had the truck been going faster, the interior of the truck would have been damaged.
The interior, you would expect to see maybe damage to the dash, the knee panels from occupants knees.
Steering wheel damage, damage to either windshield, or side windows.
Quite often unrestrained passengers will hit the rearview mirror, and break that off the windshield, or crack the mirror itself.
There wasn't any of that present in the vehicle, either.
And the physical evidence revealed another contradiction.
Peter said, he exited the truck through the passenger side But when it was brought up from the lake, the passenger side door was locked.
But when it was brought up from the lake, the passenger side door was locked.
He also said Patty was driving, and still in the truck when he exited.
But her body was found outside of the truck, at the bottom of the lake.
Inconsistent with his story.
The last-- when he saw her, she was in the driver's side of the truck.
In the Wlasiuk's home, investigators found Patty's diary.
And it revealed that Patty and Peter were living what some would call an alternative sexual lifestyle.
I just want to push you to the limit, sexually.
I wasn't able to do that by myself, so I hoped to bring in a different person.
According to the diary, Patty invited her friend-- the children's babysitter, Joyce Worden-- into their bedroom.
Patty invited her friend-- the children's babysitter, Joyce Worden-- into their bedroom.
Joyce Worden-- into their bedroom.
My wife, Joyce and I, were involved in a three-way relationship.
There was actually no need for the whole world to know that my wife had this tendency, that my wife had initiated this, that, you know, it was our private life.
But Patty's diary indicated there were problems.
I'm the one who shared my fantasy, never knowing I would be the one to play the outsider, never realizing you would like her personality better than mine.
I honestly never thought you would go elsewhere.
Patty was concerned that Peter and Joyce were meeting behind her back.
Peter denies it.
My wife had no reason to be jealous, worried, or whatever.
With Patty dead, the only way she could tell her story was through the autopsy, and forensic evidence.
There was one thing that troubled the medical examiner about Patty Wlasiuk's autopsy.
Why were there seed pods in her hair, and on her clothing?
Well, I was thinking that maybe they attached themselves to her hair, and her clothing as she was pulled out of the lake by the emergency personnel.
So I asked the police to please go back to the scene.
Look at the bank where she was removed from the water, and also look underneath the water to see if there was any evidence of this plant material, these burdocks, at the site.
But investigators found no such vegetation anywhere around the lake.
What lady goes out to pick up her kids at the babysitter with burdocks in her hair?
It just doesn't happen.
Investigators asked biologist, Julian Shepard, where burdock plants usually grow.
Typically you find them growing in old barnyards around old buildings, abandoned lots, frequently along the edges where people haven't quite mowed, but where there's some open space and it will grow up like this.
Doctor Shepard says, the plant doesn't grow in water, and there were no burdock plants in the well-tended yards along Guilford Lake.
But investigators found all sorts of wild specimens on the Wlasiuk's property.
He has a-- he has a yard that was mowed.
The yard I don't-- I would classify as not being very well kept.
The officers who did the first run said, you know, there's a lot of burdocks around his property.
Investigators found one burdock plant in the couple's backyard with a broken branch.
And there was something foreign on this plant-- strands of brown hair.
DNA tests revealed the hair was Patty Wlasiuk's.
Once we had the anatomical findings, we had to go on, and correlate them with the situation, and the scene findings.
A closer look at the truck revealed another interesting discovery.
Strands of Patty's hair were found in the back bed of the truck.
And so was her pager.
The truck also held several significant clues.
The front grill showed no damage whatsoever.
But tests, conducted by the Michigan State Police, showed that a motor vehicle, plunging into lake water at 30 miles per hour, caused significant damage to the grill.
And these studies showed something else.
A vehicle the size of a van or truck doesn't automatically sink.
It took this vehicle over a minute to sink.
Others, up to four minutes.
That said to-- to us, to me, that the average person, if they were conscious after hitting the water, should be able to escape a vehicle prior to it being submerged.
And the more we pried into his story, the more we found out his story didn't match the physical evidence.
The lake's temperature on the night of the accident was 40 degrees.
Medical experts said that if Peter had been fully submerged in the water, he would have suffered from acute hypothermia.
April water, in New York, is not some place you want to be in.
And if you are in it, for an amount of time, you know, you're gonna have signs of it.
His body-- core body temperature, from what I understand, should have been a lot lower than it was when he-- when he finally received medical treatment.
Peter's body temperature at the hospital was only slightly below normal.
When I saw him, they weren't even running a thermometer in his mouth.
And, on Peter's shoes, were the same burdocks as those in Patty's hair, and on her coat.
All of this information, combined with the cuts on the inside of Patty's lip, and the petechial hemorrhages in her lungs, led the coroner to conclude that the cause of death was suffocation-- not drowning.
And when we put all of this together, it became apparent that she was dead before she went into the lake.
Peter Wlasiuk denied killing his wife, and said he had evidence to prove it.
It's all scientific, an-- and medical.
Based on the forensic evidence, prosecutors believe that Patty Wlasiuk was murdered by her husband, Peter, who tried to make it look like an accident.
The life insurance on Patty's life was $300,000.
Money was one of the strong motives for Mr. Wlasiuk murdering his wife.
Especially evidenced by the fact that he was on the phone, less than eight hours later, trying to collect the insurance proceeds.
Prosecutors believe that Peter left the children with the babysitter so he could be alone with Patty when she came home from work.
Peter had been home from-- from his job at the bar for an hour.
According to family members, it would be normal for Peter to pick the kids up, and have them home at that time.
I'm-- I'm sure that was part of his plan, to make sure the kids weren't at the house when he knew that he was going to commit the homicide.
After Patty had an alcoholic beverage, Peter coaxed her outside, then attacked her.
Peter coaxed her outside, then attacked her.
While suffocating her, there was the cross-transfer of Patty's hair onto the burdock plant, and the seed pods into her hair.
When dragging her body to the truck, Patty's coat picked up more seed pods, and they also attached to Peter's shoes.
Patty's coat picked up more seed pods, and they also attached to Peter's shoes.
The forensic evidence suggests the body was placed in the truck bed.
Tire impressions show that Peter pulled over onto the right side of the road, slowly steered the truck through the spot without a guard rail, down into the lake.
But, he left both doors locked, and Patty's body was discovered outside the truck.
Prosecutors say Peter got into the water briefly, just enough to get himself wet, before running to a nearby home for help.
I guess one of my impressions was just how, in a way, how stupid the case was, I'm afraid.
I mean, he made all sorts of blunders.
Peter Wlasiuk was arrested and charged with murder.
At the trial, Wlasiuk took the stand in his own defense, and he changed his story.
I'm here for telling a lie.
If I didn't lie back then, I wouldn't be sitting here, today.
He now admitted that his original story to investigators was a lie.
His new story was that Patty was too intoxicated to drive, and that he ordered her to pull over to the side of the road so that he could take the wheel.
Told her, turn around, take the vehicle home.
When she turned around we were still arguing, arguing, arguing.
And in a fit of rage, she lost control of it, and put the vehicle into the lake.
It was like a road rage.
But there was no evidence that the truck ever turned around.
And why turn the truck around when your destination, the babysitter's house, was just down the road?
He was stuck with the evidence the way it was, and his story had to match with the physical evidence that we had.
Does it make sense? Absolutely not.
Does it defy logic?
Absolutely.
And there was no evidence the truck was traveling at a high speed.
Any type of acceleration along the grass should have left torn up grass, the grass pulled up by the roots, burned grass.
Had the rear wheels been on the blacktop, or in the loose, gravelly part between the blacktop and the grass, you would expect to see skid marks, or, you know, gravel thrown up, that sort of thing.
And we weren't able to find any of that either.
Between the reconstruction work, and the forensic, it's-- it's what really made the case.
There was nothing left of his first version.
And actually, his second version wasn't much better.
Wlasiuk claims that the burdocks in Patty's hair were not from his backyard, but from the lake-- and that a scuba diver he hired found proof.
Knowing what the scuba driver said, what he found, what is in his report, my scuba diver, I'm believing now that the burdocks were in the bottom of the lake.
I'm believing now that the burdocks were in the bottom of the lake.
And that's how they got on her.
The prosecution's expert said, this was impossible.
If it ended up in the water, it would deteriorate.
And when it becomes wet the-- I guess you want to call it the stickiness to your clothing, it doesn't stick like that once it's wet in deteriorating water.
The idea that the burdocks had have been got from the water was just pretty preposterous.
Prosecutors believe that Peter wanted a new life with his girlfriend, sole custody of his two children, and the $300,000 worth of life insurance.
The jury deliberated for only three hours.
Charging murder in the second degree, how do you find the defendant? Guilty, or not guilty?
Peter Wlasiuk was sentenced to 25 years to life in prison.
He continues to maintain his innocence.
They say you're innocent till proven guilty?
You're guilty till proven innocent.
And that still hinges on how much money you have.
And everybody's expecting you to prove that you didn't do it.
The forensic evidence, in this case, turned out to be a confession.
Every time Mr. Wlasiuk opened up his mouth, he said something that contradicted what the forensic evidence told us about the state of the accident scene, the state of the truck, and the state of Patty Wlasiuk's body.
Of the entire investigation, the presence of the burdocks made this case, because it made us look further, to see if, in fact, she was dead before she went into the water, or not.
It was critical in this case.
It's a small piece of evidence, and it's not even actually part of the body.
But it's what comes along with the body.
And that was key in this case.
A woman in Austin, Texas, mysteriously disappeared without saying anything to her friends or family.
And she wasn't the only one.
Two other women had also disappeared under similar circumstances.
A tooth, a single hair, an anthropologist, and a forensic artist implicated a man who had killed before in another country.
In 1998, 54-year-old Olivia Estrada was going through a very difficult time.
She had recently been divorced and was unemployed.
The only bright spot in her life was her family.
She was funny, a heart as big as Texas or even bigger.
She just had compassion for everyone.
One night out of the blue, a woman who refused to identify herself called Olivia's family with a warning.
She said to go and check on your mother, that something was wrong with her.
So family members went to investigate.
Her car's there, her keys are there.
Her house is locked.
Something happened that was against her will.
The type of door it was, you had to lock it with a key when you went out.
So whoever left last locked it with a key.
Her keys were inside.
By the time I got here, my cousin who lives next door, he had broken into the house to see if my mom was here, and when I looked down, the carpet was soaking wet.
Like, why is the carpet wet?
Detective Bob Merrill found traces of blood in the water-soaked carpet, an obvious sign of a hasty cleanup.
So at that point, we're going to start investigating it as a homicide until you know different.
Outside in the carport next to Olivia's car, investigators found evidence of a struggle.
There was a ring by the tire, and he says do you know who's ring that is?
And I said, yeah, that's my mom's ring.
So what's it doing out here?
There were traces of blood on the ring as well as on the inside of a Olivia's car, but there were no foreign fingerprints.
The few clues we did have there at the house became very crucial.
The blood in the house, the blood in the car, the blood on the carport.
The bloody ring that was found in the carport, those sort of became the factors that determined whether or not we would be able to turn this into a homicide case.
Unfortunately, investigators were not able to trace the anonymous call made to the Estrada family.
It was strange that the woman was never identified who called.
She must have been scared to come forward.
I don't know.
The next day, investigators took a second look around Olivia's home.
Tucked away in the bottom of a dresser drawer, they found a photograph of Olivia with an unidentified man.
And on the back of the photograph was written the name, Martin.
No one knew his last name.
No one knew where he was from.
No one knew anything about the man.
But Olivia's daughter recalled speaking with Martin on the telephone when she called to speak with her mother.
She said it was a bizarre conversation.
The only thing I remember he me was that he wanted to marry my mother.
I didn't even, I mean, she just met him.
And I said, my mom will never marry you.
I said I don't know who you are, or who you think you are, but my mom will never marry you.
Investigators released a photograph to the media hoping that someone could identify him.
After Olivia Estrada's disappearance, police released a photograph of the unidentified man in the picture found in her home.
Several callers identified the man has 47-year-old Martin Gonzalez, an illegal immigrant from Mexico who was working in Austin, Texas, as a laborer.
Gonzalez, an illegal immigrant from Mexico who was working in Austin, Texas, as a laborer.
When questioned, Gonzalez said he didn't know anything about Olivia's disappearance.
When he was searched, however, investigators found the house key to Olivia Estrada's home.
At the time that Mr. Gonzalez was picked up, he had the only other key that anybody knew existed in his pocket.
So that was a very strong indicator that he was the last one leave that house, which would indicate that he had something to do with her leaving.
Gonzalez said he had dated Olivia casually.
But the last time, he was at her home, he said she was there was another man, Manuel Barbosa.
And they ended up getting into a fight.
Manuel pulled a gun on him, and he left.
And Martin left.
Manuel stayed.
But a check on Barbosa's whereabouts showed this was impossible.
We checked out Manuel, and he happened to be federal custody for a long time, and was not anywhere near Austin, Texas, during that particular incident.
When investigators searched their criminal database, they discovered that Gonzales had spent time in a Mexican prison for murder.
The first murder was a fake deal, got a man to meet him out in a desolate area, and beat him to death, and took his money.
When he got out of prison, he killed another person in Mexico, and shortly thereafter, came up here to Texas.
And five months earlier, Gonzalez reported another girlfriend missing, Maria Flores.
So it was really starting to connect that we were looking at more than one missing woman involved in his life.
Investigators called what's known as the Missing Persons Clearing House, an organization that tracks missing persons' reports with unidentified bodies found in Texas, and they found something.
Persons Clearing House, an organization that tracks missing persons' reports with unidentified bodies found in Texas, and they found something.
Three years before Maria Flores and Olivia Estrada disappeared, another woman's body was discovered in a field just one block away from Martin Gonzalez's home.
That was a huge break.
I don't know that that connection would have been made without that call.
So who was this person?
Forensic anthropologist, Dr. David Glassman, examined the remains.
He noted blunt force trauma to the skull and most of the teeth were missing.
The size of the skull indicated the victim was female, and the cranial sutures revealed her approximate age.
There were some of the sutures on top of the head and the back of the head that were already fused on the external surface.
So from that, I ascertained that she would have had to have been at least 35 years of age.
Dr. Glassman also found evidence of the women's race.
She had a condition which is called Wormian bones, which are extra bones found in the suture in the back of the skull, which we see very often in Asians and Native Americans.
But without someone's DNA or dental records for comparison, investigators had no way to identify her.
To put a face with the bones, investigators turned to forensic artist, Karen Taylor.
Since the skull was so fragile, Taylor decided against creating a forensic sculpture.
Instead, she used a technique she had developed called two-dimensional facial reconstruction.
Taylor assumed the victim was Hispanic and over 35 years old.
Using anthropologic data, Taylor used rubber markers to show the appropriate tissue thickness, which differs from race to race.
That forms a basis of the contours of the face.
So once the tissue depth markers are glued onto the skull, then we literally connect the dots to develop the contours of the face.
Taylor then photographed the skull, and placed a piece of translucent vellum on top of the picture.
Vellum is the finest type of parchment available, usually made from calf skin.
Taylor then started to draw the facial features in life-size.
The average human eye is about 25 millimeters in diameter.
That happens to be about the same size as the diameter of a US quarter.
So I'll often take a quarter and center in the bony orbit of the skull and trace around it.
But the nose caused the most difficulty since it's made of cartilage that decomposes.
I look at their pure form aperture, this pear-shaped nasal opening.
Well, I add five millimeters on each side of the opening of the nose, and that gives me a sense of the width.
The angle can often be determined by analyzing the bone called the interior nasal spine.
We use that to measure and determine the projection of the nose.
There's a formula of three times the length of the nasal spine that is used for that projection.
Since most of the teeth were missing, Taylor relied on the principle known as the facial triangle.
Taylor relied on the principle known as the facial triangle.
There is an equilateral triangle created between the two corners of the eye and the middle of the bottom of the lower lip.
And I thought, aha, that's going to help me to project how the mouth might have been positioned in that blank space on the skull.
Taylor chose an appropriate hair color and an approximate weight, then put the finishing touches on her work.
The incorporation of the proportional arrangement of features in a face is very important to the recognition factor taking place.
Investigators released the forensic drawing to the media hoping to learn her identity.
And in so doing, helped solve a mystery.
Just days after the forensic drawing appeared in the Austin newspapers, a family member called from Mexico to say it looked like his mother, 48-year-old Sylvia Garcia.
48-year-old Sylvia Garcia.
She was none other than Martin Gonzalez's wife.
We got a call from Sylvia's family saying that their mother had married him, and had come up here, and they'd never seen him, or heard from her again or seen her again.
Court records indicated Sylvia Garcia had filed for a divorce from Gonzalez shortly before her disappearance.
When questioned Gonzalez denied having a wife and denied even knowing Sylvia Garcia.
He just professed ignorance, and it was unbelievable.
But inside Gonzalez's home, investigators found a photograph which bore a striking resemblance to the forensic drawing.
And that's when I really got excited, because everything did seem to fit.
It was what I would expect to see.
The proportions were correct.
Things did seem to fit.
Once we got pictures, we were convinced that that was Sylvia.
It was just proving it was the next problem.
To find out scientifically whether the skull was Sylvia Garcia's, investigators discovered that Sylvia mailed letters to her relatives in Mexico.
And those letters might have Sylvia's DNA profile.
We've looked at the envelope and saw that, in fact, the flap had either been licked or that the stamp had been licked.
So I attempted to extract DNA from the flap and from the stamp.
And I was able to generate a DNA profile from the flap of the envelope.
I think it's very fascinating, and also, that her family would have saved those envelopes.
I mean, how many people save letters that somebody sent a couple of years ago?
And who would've thought that it would help solve a police investigation?
It's just unbelievable.
For comparison, criminalist, Jody Koehler, used tooth pulp found in one of the few molars still in the skull.
Tooth pulp can be a rich source of DNA.
A PCR DNA test revealed the skull match the DNA extracted from Sylvia's letters.
Man, that was good.
You just never expected that to happen.
You hear it can happen.
It just had never happened for me until then.
I was very excited that we had actually identified this person, because the skeletal remains were fairly old.
And so it was really a shot in the dark to be able to do this.
It was great.
When investigators re-examined the bedsheet that covered Sylvia's body, they noticed a single strand of hair in the knot.
Since there was no root material, investigators decided to perform a mitochondrial DNA test.
Now the unique difference with mitochondrial DNA is only inherited from your mother.
And so men don't pass there's onto their children.
This means that siblings in the same family, or all maternal relatives in the family, for example, will share the same type.
The hair was first cleaned in ultrasonic water bath to make sure no cells from another source adhered to it.
Once the hair is thoroughly cleaned, then we grind it up in a small glass grinder that is almost like a mortar and pestle apparatus.
This powders the hair into a liquid buffer, and to this are added some chemicals that effectively purify the DNA away from everything else in the hair.
And this same procedure was repeated on a hair sample from Martin Gonzalez.
The result, the hair found with Sylvia Garcia's body belongs to Martin Gonzalez.
If you find a type that's never been seen before, as was the case in this case, you would be able to eliminate at least 99.96% of North Americans as having that type.
His hair being with the remains was crucial to show that he was involved in her ending up in that vacant field with trauma to the head.
Martin Gonzalez was arrested and charged with Sylvia Garcia's murder.
But the question remained.
Where were the other two missing women, Olivia Estrada and Maria Flores?
Olivia Estrada and Maria Flores?
When Martin Gonzalez was in prison awaiting trial for the murder of his wife, Sylvia Garcia, investigators received a telephone call.
The informant, who actually is a retired detective, was clearing some area for a fence, and he stumbled onto some bones in Bastrop County.
Dental records confirmed the remains were those of Olivia Estrada, the 54-year-old divorcee who was dating Martin Gonzalez around the time of her disappearance.
The skull showed signs of blunt force trauma, as well as a gunshot wound.
I mean, I still didn't really believe it.
And I said, Detective Merrill, is it her, is it really her?
And he says, yes.
And he had a tear in his eye.
Less than a mile away in another deserted field, investigators found the remains of the third missing woman, Maria Flores.
Maria Flores.
She had also been dating Martin Gonzalez.
And it was he who reported her missing.
Her skull showed evidence of blunt force trauma to the head.
Martin Gonzalez was charged with all three murders.
We had mitochondrial DNA, which had never been used in Texas at that point.
We had other kinds of DNA, forensic anthropologists, forensic dentists, a multitude of civilian and law enforcement witnesses, many of which were Spanish speakers.
And the logistics of putting that case together were astounding.
Prosecutors learned that Gonzalez frequented bars where he met vulnerable women some were illegal immigrants with no family or connection to Austin.
Others like Olivia Estrada were emotionally vulnerable.
She still loved my father.
I think she was just down on herself.
I really believe when she met him, she was at her lowest.
That is the only way I could see that she would never let a person like Martin in her life.
This man had a history of abusing women and charming them.
Choosing isolated women, or most of them isolated, and then lying to them, saying he owned land and becoming jealous and possessive.
Prosecutors presented evidence that the motive in these murders was anger after having been rejected.
Gonzalez refused to accept that these women no longer wanted him in their lives.
Gonzalez's telephone conversation with Olivia's daughter revealed he wanted to marry Olivia.
But Olivia told her daughter late, she wanted no part of him.
I said, mom, what is he talking about?
He says he going to marry you.
She said, he's crazy.
I said, I'm telling you what he just told me.
She says, no, he's crazy.
Don't pay attention to him.
He doesn't know what he's talking about.
I'm like, mom, what are you doing?
It wasn't long after this incident that Olivia disappeared.
In September, 2000, Martin Gonzalez was convicted of three counts of first degree murder and sentenced to life in prison.
You left her.
You threw her away like she was garbage.
She wasn't Martin.
She was not.
She was my mother.
His eyes are just void of any kind of human anything.
There's nothing there.
Nothing that's human anyway to me.
He's just a monster.
He's just a truly evil person with no conscience.
I wish he was sitting on death row instead, but he needs to be behind bars for the rest of his life.
To this day, Texas authorities remain convinced there are other victims linked to Martin Gonzalez, victims they have yet to find.
Gonzalez, victims they have yet to find.
Without the forensic drawing, investigators wouldn't have identified the skull found in the field.
I don't think he had any, any perception of forensic art in his entire imagination, but I bet he wishes he did.
It's just amazing that we can combine those types of science where she can do the facial reconstruction, and then we can confirm her facial reconstruction using this type of DNA technology.
An anthropologist friend of mine, Dr. William Maples, responded saying, patient and silent while we live, our skeletons shout to heaven and posterity after we die.
And I think that's a wonderful, quote.
It says the same thing.
The dead can speak through facial reconstruction, through forensic art.
The disappearance of a millionaire real estate developer in Las Vegas had all the appearances of foul play.
In his will, he had hinted that something terrible might happen to him.
And a scuba diver, a ballistics expert, and a pizza delivery man all provided evidence that his premonition was correct.
Every 20 minutes, a new home is finished in Las Vegas, Nevada, making it one of the fastest growing cities in the United States.
And that's how Ron Rudin made his fortune, building residential housing in the Las Vegas suburbs.
Cold Creek was a beautiful development.
It was one of the first developments where people could go and buy an acre of land, and be at 7200 feet, and maybe 30 degrees cooler in the summertime.
Despite his success, Ron Rudin also made some enemies.
He was known to evict people.
He was known to foreclose on people.
He held their mortgages.
They didn't pay, they had to go.
So there were a lot of people who didn't like Ron Rudin.
To protect himself, Ron took the necessary precautions.
Ron lived in a virtual fortress.
He had a house that was surrounded by cinder block wall and barbed wire.
And inside were attack dogs and this elaborate security system.
And inside that was an armory full of guns rifles and all this weaponry.
On a Monday morning in 1994, Ron Rudin didn't show up for work as we have always done in the 20 years he was in business.
Ron Rudin didn't show up for work as we have always done in the 20 years he was in business.
As soon as he wasn't there to open the business, a half hour before the office opened, his employees knew something was wrong.
And the fact that he lived 30 feet from the office, also told them that there was something wrong.
Ron was not one to disappear, surely.
And he was certainly not one to leave his business unattended.
Ron's fifth wife Margaret called police to report him missing.
She said he didn't come home the night before.
After that night, Ron Rudin just disappeared off the face of the earth.
There were no ATM transactions, no account activity.
He wasn't seen anywhere.
His cellphone wasn't being used.
A week later, police found Ron's car in the parking lot of a gentleman's club just off the Vegas Strip.
The man who found the car, the night manager at the strip club, was a former disgraced police officer in Las Vegas who once had mob ties.
This immediately raised a lot of eyebrows, and made people wonder is there an organized crime connection to this disappearance?
Inside the car, were traces of blood too badly degraded for DNA testing.
Forensic experts also found mud.
Well, the detectives had developed a theory.
Ron Rudin's body had been transported in the car, or in a trunk in the car.
But a forensic analysis could not determine where the mud came from.
One month later, about 60 miles away, a man hiking along Lake Mohave made a gruesome discovery.
He found a human skull.
The skull itself was pretty much intact.
And it was in a ravine about 20 yards away from an area that had been burned and charred, and, and-- We could see a lot of ash, and a lot of debris, and a lot of human remains.
Nearby, police found a gold bracelet with diamonds spelling out the name Ron.
It looked like it was placed there as if somebody wanted them to find it.
They told me briefly how he was found, the condition of his body.
It broke my heart that this man had really worked so incredibly hard, been good to lots of people.
And that would be where he would-- where his last remains would be.
What started out as a missing persons case was now a murder investigation.
It was just a complete mystery.
You know, who on earth would, would do it?
Dental records confirmed that the skull found on the shores of Lake Mohave belonged to Ron Rudin.
The medical examiner determined that Ron had been shot in the head four times with a .22 caliber pistol.
Not far from where the skull was discovered was a fire pit.
Tests on the soil indicated Ron's body had been cremated.
Once the fire started, the fat kept the fire going, much like you would burn a piece of meat on a barbecue.
I know it sounds kind of disgusting.
But you know, in forensics, you know, that's what you deal with when you're trying to prove what happened.
Also in the pit were several strips of metal and the locking mechanism, which looked like pieces of a trunk.
It was clear to crime scene investigators that this was not an organized crime hit.
You know, people wanted to think it was a mob hit.
And the fact that Ron's car was found behind a strip club after he disappeared only added to sort of the unseemly, uh, feel of the case.
A look into Ron's background revealed several potential suspects.
Ron was known to be you know, what you would call today, is a player.
He had girlfriends, and had affairs, um, according to friends and relatives.
Certainly didn't deserve to be murdered over it.
But people get killed for less.
One of the women Ron was allegedly involved with, Sue Lyles, told police about this anonymous letter her children received in the mail shortly before Ron was murdered.
Sue Lyles, told police about this anonymous letter her children received in the mail shortly before Ron was murdered.
Your mother has been screwing Ron, and keeping the secret from his wife and her husband.
You're being told now to be prepared for a big scandal.
When Ron saw this letter, he was furious and convinced that his wife Margaret had written it.
Margaret had written it.
Margaret denied having anything to do with it.
A search of the Rudins's home turned up nothing suspicious.
But the search of Margaret Rudin's antique store in town was far more telling.
I found two receipts for two humpback trunks or steamer trunks.
And by then, we knew that that's what the body was found in.
I noticed that one trunk had been sold to Margaret's sister.
And the other trunk, there was no indication in her inventory that it was sold.
But it was nowhere in the store.
And in Ron's will was another clue.
Ron had basically left a clue to solving his murder in his will.
And in his will, he said that if he died by violent means, and he even specified gunshot or some other thing, extraordinary steps should be taken to look into this death.
And people should look into whoever was going to get the money, the beneficiary.
And he gave a huge portion of his estate over to friends, and coworkers, and people that he'd had some sort of relationship or trust in the past.
And he really enriched them after his death.
And even during his life, he could be a very, very generous individual.
Ron's fifth wife, Margaret, was to receive the bulk of his estate, which was approximately $7 million.
When it eventually came out that there was that much money involved, it was, it was really a shock to us.
Although police found nothing suspicious when they searched Rudin's home, a local handyman told police, he saw plenty that was suspicious when he worked there just days after Ron disappeared.
He worked for Margaret.
He helped her decorate.
And he, uh, helped her clean up.
She told him, get rid of this mattress.
Get rid of the bed.
And tear out the carpet.
He found this dry, gooey, crunchy material in the carpeting that he was sure was blood.
The handyman helped Margaret convert the master bedroom into an office.
Although the room had been redecorated, investigators decided to test the walls and ceiling for blood that may have been removed.
Used the luminol.
It looked like the Milky Way.
Lit up like a Christmas tree.
They were certain this was the death scene.
One of the homicide detectives was walking around.
And he had kind of a funny look on his face.
And then he stopped.
And he said, wow, I think I've been in here before.
And he was right.
20 years earlier, Ron's second wife, Peggy, shot and killed herself in that same bedroom.
Now investigators couldn't be certain whether it was Ron's blood on the walls and ceiling, or that of his previous wife's suicide.
But on the wall, just above where the Rudin's bed had been, was a photograph of wife number five Margaret Rudin.
And on it was an important clue.
The investigation into the murder of Las Vegas millionaire, real estate developer Ron Rudin had initially focused on his ex-wives and business contacts.
We looked at a bunch of different people, other business associates, people who worked with Ron, other ex-wives, other relatives.
But everything came up empty.
Inside Ron Rudin's bedroom, forensic scientists found evidence of blood on the walls and ceiling, blood that had been removed.
Forensic scientist Mike Perkins performed a microscopic examination of the few blood drops that remained.
We measure the width and the length of the stains.
And using a real simple mathematical formula, we're able to determine the approximate impact angle of those blood drops on those surfaces.
Perkins concluded the blood hit the wall at high velocity consistent with gunshots from two locations.
Several shots originated from the right side of the bed.
And one from the left.
Ron's previous wives told investigators that Ron always slept with the right side of his head on the pillow.
Not surprisingly, the medical examiner found four bullet holes in the left side of Ron's skull.
Once we had placed it in that position that Ron would have slept, the holes and the directionality of the bullet wounds matched perfectly with the high-velocity blood spatter that was on the wall and on the ceiling.
But whose blood was it?
We learned from the housekeeper that Ron, when he was getting ready in the morning would cut himself shaving and would dab himself with a, uh, handkerchief.
Investigators located that handkerchief in Ron's bathroom, then compared the blood to the blood found on the walls and ceiling of the master bedroom.
And it matched.
The odds that were listed in the DNA report were one in 600 billion odds that it was anybody else's other than Ron's.
There was a photograph of Margaret Rudin hanging on the wall of the bedroom above the bed, which showed evidence that some kind of liquid had been professionally removed from the picture.
Investigators believe that liquid was Ron Rudin's blood.
Based on the forensic evidence, the police decided to arrest Margaret Rudin for her husband's murder.
My partner had called her attorney and said, hey we've got a, uh, an indictment on your client.
Will you surrender her or do we need to go get her.
He says, I don't know where she's at.
Sure enough she was gone.
Disappeared and was in the wind for a long time.
Over the next several years, there were reports that Margaret was hiding in Arizona, and later in Mexico.
But she successfully eluded police.
Margaret was pretty effective in her hiding.
She had disguises, hair dyes, books on how to disappear, different identifications, different diplomas she'd gotten.
She wasn't your normal run-of-the-mill absconder from justice.
In the meantime, a scuba diver found what looked like a gun wrapped in some cloth at the bottom of Lake Mead, about 45 miles outside of Las Vegas.
The weapon had a factory-made silencer, and was turned over to Las Vegas police.
Torrey Johnson restored the gun and test fired it.
Under a microscope, he noticed that the test shots had very unusual markings.
And they reminded Johnson of the bullets removed from Ron Rudin's skull.
I had to spend a lot of time with it.
But when I finished all those examinations, there was no doubt whatsoever in my mind that that was the murder weapon.
I called the DA.
And I told him, I said, you're not going to believe this, but I've got the murder weapon.
You know, wow, look what we've got here.
You know, I mean this is it.
This is, this is, this is the big thing in the case.
And investigators got another huge break.
Any gun equipped with a silencer must be registered with the federal government.
The time in the lake, uh, did some minor damage to the gun.
But the serial number was still there.
When Johnson called the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms with the serial number of the silencer, he was told the gun was registered to Ron Rudin.
Ron had reported it missing seven years earlier, just after he and Margaret were married.
What he said was that he knew Margaret had taken that gun.
He was convinced of that.
But he kept asking her.
And naturally, she would say no.
The only one who had access to where the gun was at, besides Ron, was Margaret.
Initially, Ron had no idea why she would have stolen it.
Now, the reason is clear.
Ron loved two things in this world, guns and women.
And in one night those two very tragically came together and caused his death.
But the question remained.
Where was Margaret Rudin?
After Margaret Rudin had eluded police for close to two years, a true crime television show featured the case, and broadcast Margaret's photograph.
A viewer in Revere, Massachusetts reported that a woman matching Margaret's description was living near him in an apartment.
Police interviewed employees of the post office across the street from the apartment who confirmed the woman matched Margaret's description.
The take-down was a classic.
You know, the Revere cops, God bless them.
They did a great job.
So they set up a surveillance and waited for an opportunity.
Margaret had ordered Domino's or some pizza delivery.
So the quick thinking cops put on a pizza delivery outfit.
With a fellow officer nearby, he knocked on the apartment door.
And she opens the door.
And then she looks at the pizza guy.
And I said, we're the police. We need to come in.
And they said, you know why we're here.
And she says, yeah, it's about that Vegas thing.
Margaret Rudin was arrested and charged with her husband's murder.
Investigators found evidence that Margaret and Ron Rudin were having marital problems.
Rudin were having marital problems.
And they also found listening devices in Ron's office, put there by a company Margaret hired.
And she had intercepted a phone call between him and a girlfriend where they agreed, agreed to meet at one of his rental homes.
And in fact, Margaret, after that, made a note in the diary that was put into evidence that we had, uh, where she was going to go and, and have somebody monitor them.
Margaret sensed the end of her marriage was near.
And she was obviously aware of the financial implications of a divorce.
Prosecutors believe Margaret waited until Ron went to sleep, then used the pistol she had taken from Ron's gun collection years earlier.
The forensic evidence shows that Margaret fired three shots from the right side of the bed, causing the blood spatter on the walls, the ceiling, and on her own portrait.
She then moved to the other side, and fired the last shot.
Prosecutors were convinced Margaret had help getting Ron's body into the trunk from her antique store and out to Lake Mohave where it was cremated.
But to date, no one has been charged.
Prosecutors think Margaret intentionally left Ron's bracelet in clear view near the fire so the remains would be easily identified, allowing her to collect the $7 million from his estate.
The murder weapon was thrown to the bottom of Lake Mead, where a weekend scuba diver happened to find it.
And runs car was left at the gentleman's club as a diversion.
Margaret had been married five times.
But she never had financial stability.
She never made enough money on her own to live on her own.
So police think that Margaret killed for one of the oldest motives in the book.
And that's money.
Margaret Rudin pleaded not guilty.
Her attorneys presented their own version of how Ron Rudin was killed, essentially becoming witnesses at the trial.
The judge ruled this was improper.
I'm, I don't appreciate you yelling at me judge.
Well, that's too bad.
The jury found Margaret Rudin guilty of first-degree murder.
She was sentenced to life in prison without parole.
She's a chameleon.
She's a chameleon in reality.
And, uh, and she's a chameleon psychologically.
The serial number on the silencer tired all of the pieces together.
Who would've ever thought that anyone would find that gun?
That was a, a miracle in itself.
The fact that Margaret used a gun with a silencer was her downfall.
It resulted in really unusual markings on the bullet that ended up being the, the whole link to find the gun.
You know, juries are often told eyewitnesses can be mistaken.
They can see things differently.
Sometimes they can outright lie.
But forensic evidence doesn't.
I mean, It is what it is.
In the middle of the night, a man watched in horror as his neighbor committed a horrible crime.
The perpetrator said he had no recollection of the incident.
It would be up to a jury to decide between the forensic evidence or the mysteries of the mind.
On a brisk January night in Phoenix, Arizona, a man heard some noises coming from his neighbor's backyard.
He actually heard some moaning sounds coming from over the fence.
He thought that perhaps the Falater's were making love, because that's what the sounds sounded like to him.
He saw Yarmilla Falater on the ground, and her husband Scott was in the house upstairs changing his clothes.
Scott came back downstairs, silenced the dog, walked outside to Yarmilla, then threw her into the swimming pool and held her head underwater.
The neighbor immediately called police.
The police found Yarmilla floating in the pool.
She had been stabbed and drowned.
Scott was inside the house, dazed and confused.
His reaction was kind of a surprise, what the officers were doing at this location.
The first question he remembers is, how many people are in the house?
To which he answered, four, immediately, not knowing his wife was dead.
Himself, his wife, and his two kids.
The Falater's two children were asleep upstairs in their bedrooms.
They heard nothing during the attack.
At police headquarters, investigators were convinced that Scott would confess, but they were met with a complete surprise.
Obviously you think I did it.
I don't-- I don't know what makes you think that.
Well, because you had a neighbor staring at you watching you do it.
That's why.
Scott Falater said he had no recollection of killing his wife.
Neighbors saw me pushing her in the pool?
You've got to be kidding.
That's what I got. -I'm sorry.
I don't remember doing it.
Friends and family told police that the Falater's never fought.
There had never been any eruption of overt conflict between the mother and father, and that whenever there were disagreements, they were settled amicably.
At Yarmilla's autopsy, the medical examiner found 44 stab wounds, as well as water in her lungs.
We had the wife, who had been stabbed multiple times, being thrown in the pool and held down.
But we also had a husband, a very devout, religious individual, telling us that it was not him who had done this.
So the decision had to be made-- were we going to believe him, or were we going to go ahead and charge him?
In the back of Scott's car, in a plastic container, police found a knife covered with blood.
They also found Scott's bloody clothing in the car.
When questioned, Scott's sister believed she knew why Scott was unaware of what happened.
It was because of something that happened between them many years earlier.
Scott and Yarmilla Falater had been married for almost 20 years.
Scott was a computer engineer.
Yarmilla was a preschool teacher's aide.
They were high school sweethearts.
Yarmilla was the only woman that Scott ever dated, and I believe it may have been the same in terms of Yarmilla's dating.
When questioned by police, Scott didn't deny he killed his wife.
Scott didn't deny he killed his wife.
But he insisted he had no recollection of the incident.
And Scott's sister offered a possible explanation.
She told police Scott had a history of sleepwalking.
She had been attacked by Scott when he was sleepwalking years ago when they were growing up in Illinois.
She had attempted to interrupt Scott as he was walking in the house-- sleepwalking-- and that startled by her interruption, he threw her across the room.
Sleep expert Dr. Rosalind Cartwright says that there's no doubt that sleepwalking occurs, although it's rare.
Some sleepwalkers, for example, have jumped out of a window or thrust their arm through a plate glass door, carved up the nice new living room furniture with a butcher knife, kicked in a garage door.
These are all patients of mine.
And some attack a person.
The closest person to them is likely to be attacked.
So the question remained, was Scott Falater sleepwalking when he murdered his wife?
To find out, Scott was monitored for four nights in a sleep laboratory.
So that they could determine the types of brain waves that were characteristic of his sleeping patterns.
Researchers connected electrodes from the polysomnograph to Falater's skull to analyze his brain activity during sleep.
The result showed something called hypersynchronous delta waves, a symptom sometimes associated with individuals who sleepwalk.
Some sleepwalkers will have it.
It's a sign of neurological immaturity.
Scott Falater told police he was trying to fix a broken pump in his swimming pool on the night of his wife's death.
He didn't finish it before his wife called him in to dinner and the family assembled, had dinner, told her about the problems at work and said he didn't know what do do.
The problem at work Scott referred to was the possible cancellation of the computer chip project Scott headed, which meant his staff would all lose their jobs.
Scott headed, which meant his staff would all lose their jobs.
After dinner, Scott said he worked at his computer, then went to bed.
He said Yarmilla was downstairs watching TV on the sofa.
Dr. Cartwright believes Scott went to sleep with the unfinished pool repair still on his mind, and while still asleep, got up to finish the job.
He put on his clothes, grabbed a flashlight, and took a knife out to the pool pump to cut a plastic ring.
When Yarmilla went outside to see what Scott was doing, she startled him, prompting the violent attack that followed.
They start out to do something related to that stressful event, and if stopped, they have a kind of fight or flight reaction of I've got to do this.
Research shows that sleepwalkers are not capable of facial recognition, which is why they sometimes attack people they know.
It's embarrassing.
You don't even know where you're walking or what you're doing.
Doug Coldren has had numerous sleepwalking incidents-- some that have included violence towards his wife.
I was on top of her, choking her.
I wasn't aware of I was even doing that.
I could tell that there's something that's drastically wrong once I woke up, but I was in a deep sleep while I was doing it.
I wasn't really aware that I even did it.
People who sleep normally move from one stage of sleep to the next seamlessly without waking.
But for reasons not entirely clear, sleepwalkers cannot successfully transition from deep sleep into the dreaming stage of sleep.
They get into a disassociated state.
It's not a normal wakefulness.
It's not a complete sleep.
It's partially one and partially the other.
Part of the brain is functioning as if awake, part of the brain If Scott Falater was sleepwalking when he committed the crime, then legally, he wouldn't be responsible.
If Scott Falater was sleepwalking when he committed the crime, then legally, he wouldn't be responsible.
That's what happened in Toronto, Canada, when 23-year-old Ken Parks was acquitted of killing his mother-in-law and attacking his father-in-law.
Even though he drove approximately 15 miles over to his mother-in-law's house and had walked down some stairs, opened the door, and then ultimately had stabbed both of the individuals there.
Well, I do agree that sleepwalkers are capable of becoming violent.
Probably over 100 published cases by people who were apparently sleepwalking.
But prosecutors weren't so convinced that Scott Falater was innocent.
As investigators searched for a possible motive in Yarmilla Falater's murder, they learned that the couple's marriage was not as happy as friends and family thought.
Scott Falater was an active member of the Mormon Church, and investigators found evidence that Yarmilla resented the amount of time Scott spent on church activities.
Yarmilla was considering a divorce.
That she, apparently, was feeling worn out by the demands of the church, while Scott was fully committed to the church.
Investigators also found evidence that Scott wanted more children and Yarmilla didn't.
Mormon families typically have a lot of kids.
She apparently put her foot down.
Did not want to have more children beyond the two teenagers that they already had.
There were also unsubstantiated allegations that one of the two may have been having an affair.
Prosecutors hired their own sleep expert, Dr. Mark Pressman, to analyze Scott Falater's behavior on the night of the murder to see if there was any evidence that Scott had been sleepwalking.
Pressman, to analyze Scott Falater's behavior on the night of the murder to see if there was any evidence that Scott had been sleepwalking.
First, Pressman disputed the significance of Falater's original sleep tests.
I didn't find that the sleep studies were very impressive at all.
Those kinds of waves can be found very commonly in patients with sleep apnea, for instance.
And there's only about 40 million sleep apnics in the United States, which means this is not specific to sleepwalking.
On the night of the murder, Falater said he went to sleep with his contact lenses in, then apparently got up, got dressed, and took a flashlight outside.
Falater said he went to sleep with his contact lenses in, then apparently got up, got dressed, and took a flashlight outside.
Dr. Pressman said, true sleepwalkers can't distinguish day from night.
That suggests that he knew it was chilly outside and it was dark outside.
And those are both pieces of information that no sleepwalker I've ever heard of would actually know or be aware of.
The neighbor said he saw Scott inside his house after the stabbing removing his bloody clothes.
Scott put those clothes and the murder weapon into a plastic container in the trunk of his car.
And he also bandaged a cut on his hand.
Again, shows that he was consciously aware of the fact he was injured.
He knew what he had to do in response to the injury, and he successfully completed it.
The neighbor also saw Scott trying to calm his dog.
Scott claimed not to have heard any screaming from his wife, and yet apparently was aware of the agitation of a pet.
An individual who is sleepwalking does not know that a dog is there.
For him to have quieted the dog meant that he was awake.
But the defense experts believed there was another explanation for the incident with the family dog.
I'm not at all sure that Scott quieted the dogs in terms of responding to them barking.
They were jumping up on him is the way it was described to me.
So I don't think that the auditory system was functioning.
And Dr. Cartwright says, Scott may not have gone directly to Yarmilla's body out near the pool before the drowning, but may have stumbled over her while sleepwalking.
Scott may not have gone directly to Yarmilla's body out near the pool before the drowning, but may have stumbled over her while sleepwalking.
She points to the neighbor's first statement to police as proof.
His first report on seeing Scott stand over the body was that he looked, glazed, staring at this object that was in his way, and that he rolled it into the pool as if he was just removing something that was in his way.
In addition, studies have shown that stress and sleep deprivation are both major contributors to sleepwalking.
It was somebody who'd had a history of sleepwalking in his past.
He had no memory of it.
He had no motivation for it.
He was bewildered and remorseful.
Sleep experts were at odds on how to interpret Scott's behavior.
The jury would have to weigh the evidence and decide whom to believe.
I think that of this case was that it was attempting to probe the secrets of the mind, you know?
The last frontier of medical science, perhaps, is the brain.
It was also seeking to probe the secrets of a family.
In 1999, Scott Falater went on trial for the murder of his wife Yarmilla.
He pleaded not guilty.
He was sleepwalking at the time the event occurred.
He had no consciousness in his mind operating at that time.
In fact, his brain was, in a fact, asleep.
Sleepwalking has been used as a defense in about two dozen murder trials worldwide.
She went down, and he continued to stab her.
But prosecutors presented a very powerful case to the jury-- one that focused on logic as well as science.
Prosecutors believe fal Falater made the decision to kill his wife and to make it appear to be the work of an unknown assailant.
When the children went to bed, Yarmilla was on the sofa watching television.
Prosecutors think Falater lured Yarmilla out to the pool, then stabbed her.
He went back upstairs to clean up, and he also bandaged his hand.
He hid the murder weapon and his bloody clothes in the trunk of his car.
When he returned to the pool, Scott quieted the dog and noticed Yarmilla was still breathing, so he dragged her over to the pool and drowned her.
Prosecutors think his original plan was to go back to bed, and the next morning, let the children find their mother's body outside.
One can only imagine that he pretends to awake, finds that his wife is gone, wakes up the children, is aghast that she is gone, goes downstairs, and the three of them find her floating in the pool, slain by an unknown intruder.
That was his plan all along.
But those plans changed when his neighbor saw the whole thing.
That was the only thing that Scott Falater did not predict.
Prosecutors think Scott may have known about the Toronto case, the man who was acquitted of killing his mother-in-law using a sleepwalking defense.
Dr. Pressman testified for the prosecution and listed 65 behaviors Scott exhibited during the commission of the crime that were inconsistent with sleepwalking.
He said, touching the cold water alone would have been enough to wake him from a sleepwalking episode.
I think all the evidence says he was awake, and all the evidence says his behaviors were far too complicated to be sleepwalking.
In testifying for the defense, Dr. Roger Broughton said, Scott's actions that night were not logical for someone who was awake.
Dr. Roger Broughton said, Scott's actions that night were not logical for someone who was awake.
It's my opinion that he was sleepwalking.
He would not leave all the evidence there.
He would not leave bloody clothes in the back of a car that he was going to drive.
He would not leave a pool full of blood.
To me, none of this makes sense.
Scott Falater took the stand and testified in his own defense.
I assume that I must have gone crazy or that something in my head had broken.
The jury didn't buy it.
We, the jury, duly empowered and sworn in the above entitled action, upon our oaths do find the defendant guilty of murder in the first degree.
Scott Falater was sentenced to life in prison.
The number of stab wounds, the fact that she was drugged to the pool and held under-- I can't believe that he was sleepwalking.
Hiding the clothes and lifting up the hatchback and scrunching down and getting underneath there and changing clothes several times and going up down the stairs, I mean, come on.
That's a lot of activity.
They said it defied common sense.
It defied their understanding of human behavior.
And even though they were willing to listen carefully to the defense experts, they said that strain of credibility just snapped under the pressure of the testimony from the next door neighbor.
I never would have thought in my wildest dreams someone would think that I premeditated and planned to murder my wife.
I just can't see how they could have come to that determination.
So I was not expecting a first degree guilty verdict.
How important was the science?
Unfortunately, I think it was not important, as far as the jury was concerned.
It did not get through to them at all.
That couldn't be further from the truth.
They understood it, and they understood it well.
They just chose to disbelieve that he was sleepwalking when he killed her.
The science of sleepwalking is a science.
But just like every other science, it is prone to being misused.
In this case, that's what was happening.
Scott Falater wanted to misuse it.
911, police emergency.
A hit and run driver left the scene of the crime, but he took something with him.
Something very important.
And he left behind a piece of forensic evidence that microscopically told a story more graphic than any eyewitness could ever have told.
On a cold February night in 1995, Todd Christensen, a Kalamazoo, Michigan policeman, was on duty in his patrol car.
Todd Christensen, a Kalamazoo, Michigan policeman, was on duty in his patrol car.
Things had been quiet, and Christensen thought it was going to remain so.
I was actually eating dinner in my car, relaxing with a peanut butter and jelly sandwich, when a frantic citizen came up and pulled up next to me.
He told Christensen that a man was badly hurt a couple of blocks away.
When Christensen got there, the man was alive, but just barely.
He was what I call circling the drain.
His breathing was not good.
He was doing all he could to just suck in air at that time-- major head trauma.
The victim, 33-year-old Kirk Hudson, was rushed to the local hospital.
When I went into the room and I saw him laying there, and his injuries, he just didn't hardly look like the same person.
So it was real hard.
And my mom was, of course, real upset.
That was her only son.
So it was very upsetting.
Hudson never regained consciousness.
He was pronounced dead before police could find out what had happened.
When my brother passed away, it affected our whole family.
My mom suffered two nervous breakdowns.
It affected all of us.
Kirk's death was the final act in a series of tragedies.
He was an unemployed Navy veteran whose 28-year-old wife died of cancer just a few years earlier.
At the time of his death, he had been caring for his mother.
She was sick and elderly.
At the accident scene, police found a damaged bicycle near Kirk's body.
What we saw is definitely evidence of a crime.
The vehicle parts, the mangled up bicycle, the person lying in a pool of blood, would lead any reasonable officer to believe that this guy got hit by a vehicle, and then that vehicle then left.
Kirk's family told police he often rode his bicycle at night.
I think maybe that was how maybe he did relieve his stress.
It didn't faze him, really, what time it was.
He was a night person, so that was his thing, you know?
He'd ride his bike at night or wherever he wanted to do.
Near Kirk's bicycle, police found a trail of plastic and glass fragments, a small convex mirror, some paint chips, and an antenna.
The first thing that ran through my mind was the driver of this vehicle was obviously drunk.
Someone left the bar, ran this guy over, either knew it or didn't know it-- regardless-- and left, because they were drunk and didn't want to get caught by the police.
This trail of vehicle parts led north along the street, indicating the direction of the driver.
From Kirk's head injuries, police determined that he was riding the bike with the traffic on the right side of the road when he was hit from behind.
This meant that the hit and run vehicle would have had right front end damage.
There was no evidence the driver used his brakes before or after he struck Kirk.
And Kirk's family couldn't understand why someone would leave him to die in the street.
This was just an accident.
He didn't mean to do it, or she didn't mean to do it.
We just wanted them to say to us that they were sorry for what they did.
And that they didn't mean to do it.
So that's all we wanted.
But the force of impact left little doubt that the driver who hit him knew what happened.
How could they just hit him and then just leave him there?
To me, that was just-- I couldn't even believe it.
I was like, why couldn't they have just stopped?
The only clues to the driver's identity were some pieces of truck or car parts left at the scene.
We knew that the evidence on top of the ice was fresh, because if it wasn't fresh, it would have frozen in the ice.
So all the piece of light lens, the antenna, reflector lens, any parts of the bicycle, the fresh paint all setting on top, we knew was fresh.
Crime scene technicians identified the location of each piece with a numbered marker and then drew a detailed diagram of the scene.
Every piece-- there were 28 in all-- was then photographed.
But it was doubtful whether these tiny clues would be enough to identify the vehicle.
After I collected things from the scene, I thought that we'd done the best job we could.
I thought that we'd done the best job we could.
But I gave it about a 30% chance of ever finding the vehicle that was involved.
I didn't think that we stood a real good chance.
Among the pieces of the vehicle were also paint chips.
One of the chips was a little bigger than a quarter and contained a wealth of information.
There were two distinct colors on the chip with a line running through them.
It was a tricolored piece of paint chip.
It was a maroon color, a black pinstripe, and mauve.
That was very unique.
That's a two-toned vehicle with a pinstripe.
A background check revealed there were very few vehicles sold with that color combination, which raised the possibility that it was a custom paint job.
That helped narrow the scope of what we were looking for even more.
Next, investigators turned to the shards of orange plastic recovered from the scene.
Under the microscope, they found a combination of small cubes and rectangles designed to reflect and shine light.
This meant it was most likely from a turn signal or parking light.
Investigators then took each charge and attempted to piece together what they had.
You literally may have one piece that's broke here and another piece that fits into it, or you get jagged pieces, and they all come together microscopically.
And that's what you look for.
On one shard, investigators found a pentagon with a star inside.
It looked like a Chrysler Dodge logo.
On this shard, there appeared to be a serial number.
The one part had some markings on it-- some numbers on it-- and I was in hopes that it would be part numbers that we could identify what type of vehicle this lens had came from.
So investigators gathered all the pieces from the crime scene and went to a local Chrysler Dodge dealership.
Dodge dealership.
And there, parts manager David Johnson found himself doing something well outside his job description.
I'd read about it in the paper about the person getting hit in downtown Kalamazoo, and they thought it might be a van of some kind that had done it.
And when the officer came in and questioned us, it's like, wow.
I wonder if it was a Dodge.
Johnson confirmed these pieces were from the plastic casing of a turn signal.
He then took the serial number and went through old parts manuals and discovered another piece of the puzzle.
There was no doubt in my mind what this came off of.
It had to be off of a Dodge van.
Once we saw the paint chip and the antenna on it, I knew it had to be a conversion van, because those were not standard items.
I knew it had to be a conversion van, because those were not standard items.
A conversion van is customized to the owner's specifications.
Johnson said the parts from the turn signal indicated the vehicle was a Dodge Ram, a van made between 1986 and 1993.
Ram, a van made between 1986 and 1993.
But a closer look at the small mirror found at the scene narrowed this down even further.
This was a customized part, and was only available from 1986 Police now knew the make and model of the vehicle that killed Kirk Hudson within a two year range.
Police now knew the make and model of the vehicle that killed Kirk Hudson within a two year range.
We were in a real big hurry to try to find the vehicle.
Time is pretty critical, you know?
You don't want that vehicle sitting out there for a long period of time.
Incredibly, in Kalamazoo alone, there were hundreds of vehicles fitting that description.
Nationwide, tens of thousands.
And the driver and his van could be anywhere.
After examining pieces of the vehicle that killed Kirk Hudson, police knew they were looking for a 1986 or '87 mauve and maroon Dodge Ram, a conversion van with a black pinstripe.
Hudson, police knew they were looking for a 1986 or '87 mauve and maroon Dodge Ram, a conversion van with a black pinstripe.
Police had a list of the hundreds of people whose vans fit the description.
It's like looking for a needle in a haystack.
It's not an easy thing to do.
Kirk Hudson's family was informed, but warned not to get their hopes up.
My brother did have a family, and they did care, you know?
He was a person, and it was important for us to follow through on this and make sure that justice was served.
A description of the van was released to the media.
Some calls came in, but they were all dead ends.
Then, about a month after Kirk Hudson's death, a customer in a local bar started to ask some questions.
I was at my my normal seat, and the bartender said something about an accident where a guy on a bicycle had been killed.
And I said, oh really?
The woman, who asked that she remain anonymous, wanted to know more about the accident.
When she heard the accident took place just a few blocks from the bar and read the description of the hit and run vehicle, she suspected she knew the identity of the driver.
Because he had the only Dodge van in that neighborhood that color.
I don't even remember what year his Dodge van was, how old it was, or new it was, or whatever.
I just know that that van, it had to be his van.
She called police to voice her suspicion that the driver of the van was Jim Northey, and she said she was with Northey on the night of the accident.
The two had been drinking together.
Well, I couldn't even possibly come close to saying how many he had.
I wasn't keeping track.
She said Northey left the bar alone in his van shortly before the accident occurred.
Northey was 46 years old, and had seven previous convictions for drunk driving.
Vehicle records confirmed he owned a 1987 Dodge Ram conversion van the same color as the one in the accident.
But when police discovered where Northey worked, they started to doubt whether they'd ever solve the case.
He worked at this local recycling place where they shred vehicles.
We were afraid that the vehicle got shredded and it's in a thousand pieces out there in the junkyard someplace.
Police rushed to Northey's home and found the windows of his garage taped closed with towels and plastic bags.
Nobody could see inside, which is unusual for a garage, which just got up my interest even more.
When questioned, Jim Northey denied he was involved in a hit and run accident, but he acknowledged that his wife had driven the van and gotten into a minor traffic accident a few weeks earlier.
I could see that the van had been involved in an accident.
The front light right light assembly had been replaced.
It was just hanging there from the wire.
But police weren't sure how they could tell whether the damage was caused by the hit and run accident or the other traffic accident Northey referred to.
Then, almost by chance, police discovered an important clue.
When I got to a workbench, it was covered with several things.
Tools, work stuff, that type of thing.
And I proceeded to take everything off from this work bench just piece by piece.
And as I got the bottom, I found one piece of orange lens-- light lens-- just like the ones we'd found out at the scene.
But it wasn't enough just to find a similar piece of plastic.
The most important thing was did it match?
Although Jim Northey denied hitting Kirk Hudson with his van, police confiscated the vehicle and ran it through a series of tests.
The first thing we did is we processed the van with luminol.
We look for trace blood.
We next processed the van to see if there was any hairs or fibers that came from the victim.
But more than a month had passed since Kirk Hudson's death, and there was no biological link between Northey's van and the crime scene.
So police turned to more durable evidence-- the plastic and paint from the suspect vehicle.
A comparison analysis was done on a paint sample from Northey's van and paint chips from the crime scene.
The colors and chemical composition of both samples were identical.
The state police crime lab did match up paint from the vehicle and paint from the scene.
Next, investigators turned to the tiny chip of plastic they'd found on Northey's workbench.
As if they were putting together a jigsaw puzzle, they tried to fit this chip into the turn signal partially reassembled from the crime scene.
Incredibly, the piece fit.
When an amber lens breaks, the pieces don't even break the same way again.
So basically, we had a fingerprint found at the scene.
There was no doubt.
This tiny shard of plastic told an important story.
It was proof that Jim Northey had removed the broken turn signal lens, placed it temporarily on his workbench, and when he went to throw the broken item away, inadvertently left behind this one tiny piece that matched the broken pieces at the crime scene.
Investigators now turned to Kirk Hudson's bike.
They placed it next to the suspect van in an attempt to gauge the point of contact.
There was a dent in the bicycle that would have been similar from where the van hit it.
The same height, the same location, passenger side.
Just all kinds of jigsaw puzzle pieces fitting together like a glove.
I saw the damage to the bicycle matching up to the van, the parking light lens at the same height as the seat, the color scheme of the van as to what we picked up out there, the antenna.
I got that warm fuzzy feeling that we'd done our job.
We'd got the vehicle involved.
Based on the forensic evidence, Jim Northey was charged with leaving the scene of a fatal accident.
Jim Northey was charged with leaving the scene of a fatal accident.
It was good to have the person's name.
That was important.
Not that we knew him, but just who it was.
That maybe we could get some closure.
Northey was offered a chance to plead to a lesser charge in exchange for a reduced sentence, but he refused.
The defense team was convinced the tiny bits of plastic and paint assembled by forensic technicians weren't enough to convince a jury.
But they faced a major hurdle.
Since no one had seen Northey driving, all they had was the physical evidence to put his van at the crime scene.
There were no eyewitnesses.
And when there are no eyewitnesses, that remains a difficult part to sort out in your mind until you hear all the evidence.
The pieces of amber parking light lens that you took from the scene-- During the trial, prosecutors spent hours telling the jury how each and every piece of plastic and paint fit together.
During the trial, prosecutors spent hours telling the jury how each and every piece of plastic and paint fit together.
When completed, it told the story of how Kirk Hudson had been hit and left to die.
Scientific evidence is always compelling.
Juries love scientific evidence.
They watch CSI.
They watch your show.
This is the rare type of case where we actually have a lot of scientific evidence.
It had to be more than coincidence that a piece of plastic or a paint chip or a piece of glass doesn't just happen to be there.
And when they showed them, blew them up, magnified them, it was easy to see how they exactly matched, and that was very convincing as a juror.
All of these little markers here that I referred to are pieces of evidence.
After a three day trial, and only four hours of deliberation, the jury found Jim Northey guilty.
They jury put him behind that wheel beyond a reasonable doubt.
That pretty much is the end of the story.
He was sentenced to four years in prison.
Kirk Hudson's family still grieves, but they're grateful the killer unknowingly left behind the information that led to his capture.
And I know that all those little pieces came to be one piece that really helped solve the case.
Maybe if this had happened 20 years ago, it might not have gotten solved.
But it took all those little pieces to come together to get it solved, so we're very grateful for that.
Evidence is great for any criminal proceeding.
You know, I can sit here and say you ran a stop sign, and you say, no I didn't.
But if I say I got your fingerprint or I got your parking light, you can argue it.
It's evidence.
Another moral of this story is dogged police work and investigation, patience, determination, can bring people to justice that otherwise might have avoided it.
Bombings are often difficult to solve since the perpetrator usually has left the scene,-- -and the evidence goes up in smoke.
But there are clues, if investigators know what to look for.
In this case, a tiny piece of plastic, the size of a grain of sand, would hold the key to a man's murder.
At one time, the Bethlehem Steel mill in Sparrows Point, Maryland was the world's largest steel-making plant.
Maryland was the world's largest steel-making plant.
More than 30,000 employees produced an incredible 15 tons of steel per minute.
45-year-old Nathan Allen worked at the mill to support his five growing children, who ranged in age from seven to 16.
Nathan Allen was well-liked.
He was a hardworking man.
He worked.
And when he wasn't working, he was taking care of his children.
NATHAN ALLEN JR.He was dedicated to raising us kids, taking care of five kids with a job.
And that's all he did was work and take care of us.
Around 11:00 PM on May 10, 1979, Nathan Allen and a friend had just finished work and were heading home.
Nathan Allen and a friend had just finished work and were heading home.
When Nathan got into his truck and started it, there was an explosion.
Nathan was blown through the windshield.
He didn't die right away.
He lived for a period of time in what the doctors called was excruciating pain.
They couldn't even describe it to us.
Maybe we were hoping it was a mistake, but it wasn't.
And we were just devastated.
We didn't know what we were going to do.
It was really rough.
Nathan Allen died.
But miraculously, the passenger, Robert Riffey, was not badly hurt.
Robert Riffey received minor injuries, hearing loss, and some other minor injuries, but he survived.
When questioned, Riffey was able to provide some important information.
He said the explosion didn't happen until after Nathan started the truck.
At first, investigators suspected that a gasoline leak might have caused the explosion, but that was eliminated fairly quickly.
We could see that the crater was actually blown in towards the gas tank, not out from the gas tank.
So we knew that the gas tank didn't have anything to do with the explosion.
Investigators performed a grid search, examining every inch of the parking lot, and found a key piece of evidence.
In one of the squares, I located what was the end cap, a small, plastic, rubber-type material that is the end cap to an electric blasting cap.
I located what was the end cap, a small, plastic, rubber-type material that is the end cap to an electric blasting cap.
A blasting cap is a device used to detonate explosives.
That find is quite unique.
Usually, you do not find the end of the blasting cap because it is-- it's inserted into the explosives and usually is completely destroyed.
And they also found small pieces of blue and yellow plastic-coated wire.
And those are the colors and the type that are used in the electric blasting caps used in the initiation for commercial-type explosives or even military-type explosive.
The detonation wires were attached to the truck's electrical system, specifically the secondary lights, meaning the bomb exploded when the driver hit the brake lights or used the turn signal.
And what that does is it establishes a window of time during which the device may have been placed.
Nathan's truck had been in the parking lot from 3:00 PM until the explosion around 11:00 p.m.
This proved that someone tampered with the truck's wiring while it sat in the parking lot.
It became significant.
Obviously, he didn't drive there without using the brakes.
So it let us know that the device had to have been connected in the parking lot.
The bomber does not have to be around and watch his victim.
He doesn't-- it's not what we call a command detonation.
There's no wire leading somewhere, and he has a big plunger to make the thing go off.
The bomb is a self-contained unit because it uses the automobile's own power to set the explosive off.
So the bomber could watch if he wants, or he could be 1,000 miles away.
It doesn't make any difference.
But investigators had no obvious suspects, which meant that if the bomber decided to strike again, they'd have no way to stop him.
Investigators believed the explosion that killed Nathan Allen was a commercial explosive, the type used by experts.
The intricacy of the device would be the understanding that the bomber needed to have of the electrical wiring system of the vehicle, so as to preclude himself from being blown up when he connected the wires to the electrical system.
It would-- it would have required more than just a grassroots knowledge.
And they had to consider whether tensions between steel workers and company management had finally turned deadly.
No one knew why anyone wanted to kill Nate Allen, and so the agents began looking at possible reasons why.
One was Nate Allen had been involved in some union activity.
The first things we kick around on almost any of the cases were, was it somebody they knew?
Was it somebody they worked with?
Who did they have an argument with?
Or, you know, who would want to do something like this to him, you know?
But according to co-workers, Nathan Allen and his passenger, Robert Riffey, were both popular and friendly with fellow workers and management.
It didn't appear that any of them had any obvious enemies.
Nothing jumped out and said, here I am.
The bomb had been placed directly under the driver's seat, which indicated that the truck's owner, Nathan Allen, was the intended victim.
Police asked Allen's family if anyone in Nathan's personal life may have wanted to harm him.
Nathan's estranged wife was in a psychiatric hospital hundreds of miles away when the bombing occurred and was not considered a suspect.
My parents were separated and divorced.
And we all wanted to live with our father, so we did, because my mom was always kind of sick and if she didn't take her medicine, she wasn't doing real well.
Nathan's aunt, Sandra Sue McFillin, took care of Nathan's children while he was at work.
She and her husband Pete insisted he had no known enemies.
Inspector Clouseau had a saying, we suspect everyone, we suspect no one.
Basically, you need to come in-- into an investigation like this with no predisposition.
If you come in with a predisposition, you have a tendency to follow avenues that-- that may not be the right avenues.
Investigators knew that someone had armed the bomb while Nathan's car was parked at work.
Unfortunately, the parking lot was open to anyone, not just employees, and there was no video surveillance.
With no suspects and no apparent motive, investigators hoped debris at the bomb site would help identify the killer.
One way of solving a bombing, and I believe it's the best way, is trace the evidence.
Find something that's unique and trace it back to the actual bomb scene or trace it back to the suspect.
There were thousands of pieces of potential evidence in the bomb debris.
Foam padding and other materials from the truck needed to be separated from potential evidence, and for that investigators used a black light.
There was material that was standing out pretty strongly, and I was able to recover them.
They, they, they clearly were not pieces of fabric or other material.
Peimer saw thousands of granules, each the size of a grain of sand, that looked as if they were made of plastic.
Under a microscope, each one had six layers, each layer a different color, white, blue, white, purple, yellow, and red.
When I found them, I didn't believe it at first.
I went away.
I got some coffee.
I came back, and I looked at them again.
And then, he remembered.
Once I looked at them, there was nothing else it could possibly be.
It was a discovery that would make scientific history.
Investigators found thousands of multi-colored plastic fragments, each the size of a grain of sand, in the bomb debris that killed Nathan Allen.
At first they were baffled.
But then, they remembered.
These fragments were taggants.
They were put into explosives as an experiment by the ATF as an aid to investigators.
It was a microscopic chip that they place inside of a-- the explosives themselves.
They're microscopic, but they are color-coded.
At the time, only 1% of all explosives had them.
In addition to having the colors, the chips also had a fluorescent layer on one side and a magnetic layer on the other.
Peimer called the ATF, gave them the color sequence.
And he was given the corresponding date/shift code.
It's like finding the explosives unexploded and finding the date/shift code on the explosive and being able to trace them out.
And once you can do that, you go through the records and see who bought it, or who stored it, or who stole it, or whatever it happens to be.
The order of the colors indicated the code was 8DEO2A146.
These meant that the explosives were made by the DuPont Company and were a brand called Tovex 220.
The code number also identified the plant, the date, the time it was manufactured, and the lot number.
In other words, investigators could trace the explosive from the plant to the store which sold it.
This lot of explosives was sent to a dealer in West Virginia, which sold them out of his garage.
The dealer provided a list of every customer who had purchased Tovex 220 explosives from this lot.
Back then, essentially what you needed was a driver's license or some form of identification to fill-- to be able to fill out the ATF explosive form.
Today, it's a lot different.
There were 15 people on the list, and investigators recognized one of them.
It was Pete McFillin, Nathan Allen's uncle, whose wife babysat for Nathan's children.
The taggants were the first really big break with the date/shift code.
Subsequently, seeing the McFillin name attached to the purchase of-- to the purchase of the explosives was absolutely significant.
It was jubilation.
It was like scoring a touchdown and spiking the ball in the end zone.
Family members couldn't believe it.
My dad and my Uncle Pete, they grew up together, and they were close their whole lives.
They were more like brothers, probably, than anything.
So he wanted to be a tough guy.
I don't know how tough he was.
When questioned, McFillin said he'd bought the explosives to remove some tree stumps on a piece of land he owned.
And he said he still had them in his garage.
Pete McFillin said, I found my explosives.
I have them right here.
Interestingly enough, the Tovex that he had was Tovex 210, an entirely different product.
Pete McFillin wasn't able to produce the Tovex 220, which he'd purchased in West Virginia.
220, which he'd purchased in West Virginia.
And investigators discovered McFillin was an automobile mechanic, who regularly serviced Nathan's truck.
My father was a real good mechanic.
He could fix about anything.
And I was told about a week before the explosion happened that Nathan was having a problem with his brake lights, and he'd asked my father to fix them.
And my father rewired the brake lights, or whatever he did to the vehicle.
In a toolbox in McFillin's car, investigators found some blue and yellow wires.
Forensic analysts used infrared spectrography to analyze the chemical components of the wires.
A beam of infrared light is passed through the material.
The material that you're testing either absorbs or reflects the light.
And as it absorbs or reflects the light, the graph goes up and down, and this produces a tracing.
The results indicated that the plastic used to make the wires found in Pete McFillin's toolbox was identical to the plastic in the wires found at the bomb scene.
Another piece of evidence that was found during the search warrant was a notebook, which contained the information that showed the shifts and the times that the victim worked.
This information was examined forensically, and an association was made between the handwriting in the notebook and the handwriting of the suspect.
Pete McFillin was arrested and charged with his nephew's murder.
All investigators needed now was the motive.
Investigators, family, and friends all wanted to know why Pete McFillin would murder his nephew Nathan Allen.
Family members provided a possible explanation.
They said that Nathan Allen and Pete McFillin's wife, Sandra Sue, used to date when they were teenagers.
Sue, used to date when they were teenagers.
I imagine, in around 1955, Nathan and Sue kind of hit it off, and they were boyfriend and girlfriend.
I don't think there was any reason for my father to be jealous, but it was probably always that in the back of his mind that there-- something could happen.
25 years later, Nathan was a single father, and Sandra Sue babysat his children when he was at work.
Pete McFillin felt that Sandra Sue was spending entirely too much time with the Allens, and particularly with Nathan Allen.
And he felt that she was not spending enough time with him and not fulfilling her responsibilities as a wife to him, and felt that Nathan Allen was the person responsible for this.
My father would just say, Pete, come on now, you know better.
But that would be the end of that, and they would just leave, you know, well enough alone and go on.
He had a potential to do something drastic, and I-- I would think, from his previous experiences with my mother, he was-- I think he was pretty jealous of my mother.
And I know he was-- he had threatened her a lot of times, threatened to kill her.
Everybody knew that she did not have this affair with him.
The only person that knew that there was one was my father, Pete McFillin.
He had an affair in his own mind because he was crazy.
He was just a son of a bitch.
That's all there was to it.
He was a crazy son of a bitch.
There was never an affair.
Prosecutors believe jealousy got the best of Pete McFillin, who set out to kill his nephew Nathan Allen, and he had the skills to do it.
McFillin, who set out to kill his nephew Nathan Allen, and he had the skills to do it.
When Nathan asked his uncle to fix the lights in his truck, Pete seized the opportunity.
Pete seized the opportunity.
He made a bomb using the explosives he'd purchased in West Virginia and attached it to the underside of Nathan's truck directly beneath the driver's seat.
He mistakenly left some of the excess wiring in his tool chest.
On the day of the murder, Pete drove into the Bethlehem Steel parking lot and wired the bomb to the truck's secondary lighting system.
McFillin knew Nathan's schedule, which was found in his garage, but he had no way of knowing that Nathan had offered his friend, Robert Riffey, a ride home that night.
Most of the evidence went up in smoke, except for the microscopic taggants put into the explosives, which tied Pete McFillin directly to its purchase.
McFillin directly to its purchase.
Pete McFillin was tried and convicted of murder and was sentenced to life in prison.
Even though we could prove that Pete McFillin might have a motive to kill Nate Allen because of his jealousy, motive doesn't take you to guilt.
McFillin might have a motive to kill Nate Allen because of his jealousy, motive doesn't take you to guilt.
The only thing, I believe, that took us to guilt in this case was the forensic evidence.
Especially the taggants was-- made the investigation a lot easier, .
I don't think we could have solved it, and-- and I don't believe we would have got a conviction without the taggant evidence that we had.
In a lot of instances in explosive cases, you can say to yourself, I know that he's the bomber.
But you cannot put the-- you cannot put him forensically with the bomb.
The taggants allowed us to forensically attach the suspect to the bomb.
Pete McFillin was the only person in the United States to be convicted with taggant evidence.
States to be convicted with taggant evidence.
The ATF abandoned its taggant program in 1979 because of the costs involved as well as political concerns.
The explosive taggant program should have continued.
It provides a lot of information for investigators.
It acts as a deterrent to bombers.
There are a lot of reasons to-- to tag, and the number one reason is just solve cases.
Today, Switzerland is the only country with a mandatory taggant program.
The forensics pointed to an accidental death.
But the circumstantial evidence suggested something more sinister.
Was it possible that an alarm clock, some laundry and a trash bag could explain the mystery of a young woman's death?
The United States Air Force has the most technologically advanced fighter jets in the world.
As a mechanic, Staff Sergeant Ron Gillette's job was to keep those jets flying.
He was good at it, too, and worked at both the George Force Base in California and the Nellis Base in Las Vegas.
Base in California and the Nellis Base in Las Vegas.
He was very competent.
He would not have gone on so many temporary duty assignments to Nellis Air Force Base had he not been very good at his job.
Ron, his wife Vicki, and their two children made their home in California where they both grew up.
On August 28, 1984, Ron returned home after running some errands.
At first glance, it looked like his wife was sleeping in bed with their three-year-old son.
But when he looked closer, he noticed she was unconscious.
A plastic laundry bag was close to her face.
When paramedics arrived, they pronounced Vicki dead at the scene.
She was 26 years old.
She was lying on her side, and there was blood coming from her mouth and her nose, which indicated to us possibly a drug overdose.
Ron was there.
Very distraught.
Crying uncontrollably.
Very upset.
Ron told investigators that Vicki had some problems sleeping, so the night before, at her request, he put four sleeping pills into her mixed drink.
It appeared that Vicki lost consciousness while doing the laundry and rolled over onto the plastic laundry bag.
On the kitchen counter, investigators found a used glass and an empty container of an over the counter sleep medication in the trash.
We then sent the drinks off that were found in the house to the laboratory so that they could do testing on it using a gas chromatograph, mass spectrometer, to try to identify the presence of drugs in the drink.
And the only drug that was found was the over the counter sleep medication.
The autopsy didn't reveal much.
It was a typical problematic case.
You've got somebody who's dead, and the autopsy doesn't really show very much.
Very non-specific things.
The medical examiner found some swelling in Vicki's lungs, called pulmonary edema, and a scrape on her upper lip.
But there was no evidence of asphyxiation.
The cause of Vicki's death was officially ruled as undetermined.
I think the original autopsy listed cause of death unknown with the kind of a question mark of liver disease or liver failure as a potential contributing factor.
Ron's coworkers corroborated his alibi that he was working on the morning of his wife's death, and investigators were about to chalk this up to an unfortunate accident.
She did not have any drinking or drug problems, and that she was a loving mother to her two young children who, I believe, were ages three and five at the time.
And there was no evidence there to be gleaned that would explain her death.
But Ron Gillette, of all people, wouldn't let the investigation die.
Ron ran to the coffin and fell on his knees and started crying and screaming, saying, Vicki, why?
Why did you do that to yourself and to me and to my kids?
The medical examiner ruled the cause of Vicki Gillette's death as undetermined.
Even to cynical investigators, there was nothing to indicate foul play.
So we had nothing.
We had no murder weapon, we had no motive, we had no evidence that a murder had even been committed.
Toxicology tests performed during Vicki's autopsy found sleeping pills in her system, and scientists estimated she had consumed about 16 tablets, not the four Ron told them about.
But 16 tablets is a small fraction of a fatal dose, and it was entirely possible that Vicki had taken the pills herself.
Investigators did find some suspicious items in the Gillette's apartment.
First, there was an alarm clock in the master bedroom set to 3:00 AM.
And inside the plastic laundry bag found next to Vicki's body were clothes, but not the kind you'd expect.
I think there was a shirt in there that was still partially folded.
And so I smelled the clothes, and they had the distinct smell of detergent.
These weren't old clothes. This wasn't dirty laundry.
That created all sorts of eyebrow raising on our part.
So now we had what we believed was a staged crime scene.
Then a new witness came forward who saw something suspicious on the morning Vicki died.
There was a neighbor who saw Ron waiting on the steps for the ambulance to arrive.
When the ambulance showed up, then he started crying.
That was pretty compelling.
And if that weren't enough, just 11 days after Vicki's death, Ron Gillette was spotted at a local rental car agency when he returned from a trip to Las Vegas.
Ron Gillette was spotted at a local rental car agency when he returned from a trip to Las Vegas.
She said, you know that guy whose wife died?
He rented a car from me not long after she died, and he just brought the car back.
Attached to the rear view mirror of the car was one of those wedding decorations, and attached to his arm was a very attractive young Hispanic woman.
They seemed very close, very intimate.
Investigators literally couldn't believe it.
So they called Ron to check the story.
Ron said, yeah, that's my new wife.
He said, I just married her.
She's a wonderful person.
He said, well, you know, my children-- he told me, my children really need a mother.
They just need the mother.
They need someone in their lives.
I was like, I was waiting for her, for the kids, for my sister.
It was really sad.
It's just something that you just can't believe it.
Ron's new bride, Sue Yen, was a Nicaraguan citizen living in Las Vegas.
Ron said he met her a year earlier.
He was living two separate lives-- the life with his wife and children at George Air Force Base, and the life with his new love interest at Nellis Air Force Base.
And he was on temporary duty assignment quite regularly.
Interesting to note that Sue Yen told us that she was pregnant with twins, which was another piece of this puzzle.
Sue Yen said they had been engaged for months, and she had given him an ultimatum.
Sue Yen told Ron that if you don't marry me this time, in September, it's over.
I don't want to see you anymore.
And Ron really loved her.
Very attractive young lady.
Investigators discovered that the wedding invitations were mailed before Vicki's death.
Sue Yen told police that she was unaware Ron had been lying to her.
She said that she knew nothing of this and he told her that his-- Vicki had died of brain cancer two years ago in Mexico.
We knew Sue Yen had really nothing to do with this.
She was a dupe.
Usually you have a cause of death and search for a motive, but now we had a motive.
Now we had a motive, really, in search of a cause of death.
We believe that Ron Gillette killed Vicki rather than divorce her, because he got so far in debt for the wedding that he needed money to pay off all his debt that he had accrued in buying the wedding ring, the wedding gown, and all the wedding invitations and the honeymoon.
He had a life insurance policy on Vicki in the amount of $27,000.
That would have paid off all his debt and given him some money to spare.
Investigators now had plenty of circumstantial evidence to suggest homicide, but little if any forensic evidence.
Could a second look at the Gillette's apartment yield something useful?
Marrying this other woman literally days after he buries Vicki-- he goes to Las Vegas and marries Sue Yen and brings her back.
Sue Yen and brings her back.
Brings her back after the honeymoon to the same home where Vicki has died literally two weeks earlier.
And you're right.
You could not script that and have it be believable.
With behavior like that, investigators reexamined the circumstances surrounding Vicki Gillette's death.
Kevin Poorman analyzed the plastic laundry bag found next to Vicki's body.
It was actually a trash bag.
The forensic side of me began to try to assess what can we do with the bag?
What's the potential value of the bag?
Is there any forensic processing that needs to be done with the bag?
Ron Gillette said he found Vicki in bed with the plastic bag on or close to her face as if she had accidentally rolled onto it and suffocated.
To test this theory, investigators look for facial oils on the outside of the bag.
Poorman placed the bag in an airtight chamber and then introduced heated super glue, which adheres to any skin oils present.
But he found none.
I can't tell you how disappointed we were when he made that phone call.
But when he got off the phone, Poorman realized he had made a crucial mistake.
Poorman realized he had made a crucial mistake.
We realized that the bag was inside out.
That because of the way it's manufactured, it's a pleated bag, and there's a heat seal on one end.
When you pull it inside out, it doesn't lay flat anymore.
Poorman repeated the super glue fuming test, and this time he found something.
What we saw was a large oval area that at some point, something oval and presumably oily was present.
When he examined the bag with special lighting, Poorman saw even more.
Poorman saw even more.
Under oblique lighting is when I really saw the facial features, in particular the stretched impression of the nose area and the chin area in the center of this large oval.
And I remember thinking to myself at that point, I wonder if we're looking at the death mask of Vicki Gillette.
I wonder if we're looking at the death mask of Vicki Gillette.
Poorman searched the forensic literature, hoping to find some way to confirm that this was a facial impression.
But he found nothing.
So he devised a test of his own with trash bags which were the same brand as Vicki's laundry bag.
And what we did was have the volunteer place their face on the bag, and we pushed from behind their face into the bag to create face impressions, looking for not only the actual transfer of oils to the bag, but also to see whether there were any actual stretching that was occurring in the bag itself.
Poorman used six different bags, and each time, he increased the pressure on the subject's face.
After the sixth test, the volunteer said the pressure was so great she declined to participate further.
Poorman looked at all six bags, and only one matched the stretch marks found on the laundry bag.
It was the last one.
The one where the most pressure had been applied.
This test proved that the image on the laundry bag was a human face, and was created by extreme force, not by accidentally rolling onto it.
And we got very excited, because now we had the murder weapon.
This was huge.
And a life-sized photograph of Vicki Gillette was a perfect match of the image on the laundry bag.
Ron Gillette was arrested and charged with his wife's murder.
Never had a plastic big with a face print ever been used in any murder trial ever.
The defense attorney called it the shroud of Poorman, but we just called it the death mask, and that was our version.
This is the death mask of Vicki Gillette.
But prosecutors wondered whether their trash bag test would hold up in court.
Prosecutors believed that Ron Gillette decided weeks, if not months earlier to kill his wife Vicki in order to marry his Las Vegas fiancee, Sue Yen.
Ron's telephone calls to Sue Yen were proof of premeditation.
Beginning in August, he started calling from his home phone.
This was significant, because we found out that Vicki paid all the bills.
He started calling from his home phone in August, because he knew she was not going to be alive to open up the bill and pay it.
And investigators found evidence that Vicki's kneecaps had been broken and surgically repaired 18 months before her death.
Ron admitted during police questioning that he was the culprit.
Ron said Vicki had dropped some pretzels, and I became angry with her and I pushed her to the floor and broke her kneecaps.
So we have now an admission of a propensity for violence with his wife, some domestic abuse, which is helping us sew this case up.
Prosecutors say the night before Vicki's death, Ron Gillette crushed 14 sleeping pills and put them into Vicki's drink, believing this would kill her.
Gillette crushed 14 sleeping pills and put them into Vicki's drink, believing this would kill her.
Ron set the alarm for 3:00 AM.
And when he awoke, he was surprised to find Vicki still alive.
Vicki still alive.
So he decided to suffocate her with a plastic trash bag.
But her face oils and the impressions from her nose and chin were left on the bag.
Ron turned the bag inside out, filled it with clean laundry, and placed it on the bed to make her death appear accidental.
He then put his three-year-old son into bed with his dead wife to further mask the deception.
And in so doing, a completely heinous act, he leaves the young son in bed with the dead mother.
The son didn't wake up.
By the grace of God, the son didn't wake up and find his mother dead.
11 days later, with Vicki out of the way, Ron married his fiancee Sue Yen, and used Vicki's $27,000 life insurance to pay for the wedding.
Ron married his fiancee Sue Yen, and used Vicki's $27,000 life insurance to pay for the wedding.
What's interesting is that they had already sent out wedding invitations to family members while Vicki was still around.
They had ordered the cake, they had set up the groomsmen and the tuxedos and the dresses.
At the trial, the defense claimed Ron was telling the truth that Vicki's death was an accident.
Their position was that the autopsy did not corroborate the prosecution's theory.
Our approach from the defense standpoint was to show that there was no homicide.
That Vicki, his first wife, had died of some kind of natural-- I want to say natural causes, or at least unexplained causes.
I want to say natural causes, or at least unexplained causes.
That we were going to admit that Ron had developed this relationship with Sue Yen while on temporary duty assignment at another Air Force Base, but it was simply happenstance.
And the defense had a surprise witness-- a Navy pathologist who would be testifying that there was no homicide.
I was looking at the slides, looking at the report, going back and forth.
And suddenly I said, wait a minute.
This case looks exactly like another one I've seen recently where a man died because a car slipped off a jack, landed on his chest, and kept him from breathing.
The evidence in that case were small ruptured blood vessels on the man's lungs.
Dr. Clark reviewed the autopsy slides and found the same bleeding in Vicki Gillette's lungs.
Seeing the little areas of bleeding there is indicative of pressure changes in the lung that you see when airflow is obstructed through the nose and mouth.
Dr. Clark changed his mind.
He now believed Vicki Gillette had been murdered.
He told the defense about this on the morning he was set to testify.
It was just like being hit in the stomach and having all the air go out of your body.
The prosecution called Dr. Clark to the stand, and his findings, along with the trash bag tests, convinced the jury.
If we didn't have that plastic bag, we were screwed.
We could not prove this without the plastic bag.
We had the murder weapon.
I was the key to the whole damn thing.
Ron Gillette was found guilty of first degree murder.
He was almost sentenced to death.
But one juror held out, so he was sentenced to life in prison without parole.
Incredibly, Ron served only 15 years of that sentence before he was released for good behavior.
He now lives in Las Vegas with Sue Yen and their children.
I didn't know. I didn't know until he was free.
I didn't know until he was free. -Does it anger me?
Ron deserves to be in jail for the rest of his natural life.
That's where he deserves to be.
He murdered this woman with callous disregard.
He had another life he wanted to go on to, so he took the mother of his children and his wife of some years and just killed her because he had better things to do.
Investigators were overwhelmed by the carnage in a single case, arson, murder, fraud, suicide, and more.
The bizarre trail of evidence left even seasoned investigators baffled.
Could forensic science unlock its secrets?
There's very little crime in Newman Lake, Washington, a small town outside of Spokane, which was why Bob Wood moved here after his divorce.
What attracted me to Bob was he seemed to have a lot of care for his children.
He was a single father.
I was a single mother at the time.
We had a lot in common in that factor.
Bob had custody of his two children, 16-year-old Theresa and 11-year-old Christopher.
Theresa and 11-year-old Christopher.
For the Wood family, February 9, 1999 began like most other mornings.
Theresa left for school around 8:00 AM.
Bob Wood left for work soon afterwards.
And Christopher was the last one out of the house.
Around 8:30, neighbors saw smoke coming out of the windows and called the fire department.
The principal from the school came right down to the house and told us that-- that Chris had not come to school, and that he may be in the fire.
Firefighters searched the home in a frantic effort to find him.
Sometimes kids hide in-- in a building after they set a fire.
And we didn't know his-- whether he did that, whether he went and hid somewhere else in the house and was overcome by smoke.
I kind of figured that Christopher had accidentally set the fire.
Because a couple weeks before that, Bobby had called me and said he was having problems with Christopher and matches.
Christopher wanted to set fires.
But firefighters couldn't find him.
Bob Wood learned about the fire while he was on his way to work.
When he returned home, the center of the house was completely destroyed.
Bob's first priority was to find his son Christopher, whom he believed was hiding out of fear.
He doesn't need to worry about the house or what was-- what happened here.
He just needs to get himself home.
It was the middle of winter, so everybody was worried that Christopher might, you know, if he was out hiding in the woods that he-- he could die of exposure.
It gets cold in Spokane.
Neighbors and sheriff's deputies organized one of the biggest manhunts in the town's history.
About five miles away, a motorist discovered Christopher's backpack along the side of the road, but there was no sign of Christopher.
Meanwhile, investigators needed to find out whether the fire was arson.
So they brought in an accelerant-sniffing dog to determine whether a flammable material was present.
The dog found nothing.
But investigators discovered where it started, in the family room.
There was a V pattern originating from the sofa, which was against a wall.
And there was a very distinct line or mark of demarcation along the-- on the wall that pointed to a particular end of the sofa.
When a fire starts on a sofa, investigators usually suspect arson.
For two days, police and volunteers searched for Christopher.
Then a snow plow driver found his body in a snow bank along a deserted road 15 miles away.
I-- I remember it.
I was broken-hearted.
There were ligature marks around Christopher's neck, evidence that he had been strangled.
It appeared that Christopher had not been murdered there as there was very little disturbance in the snow, only enough to show that somebody had stopped there and dumped the body off the side of the road.
During the autopsy, forensic experts found no evidence that Christopher had started the fire.
Examination of Chris's hands showed no sooting or fire products on his hands.
He had no sooting in his lungs, no carbon dioxide in his blood.
But investigators found a telling clue that Christopher had been abducted.
His sneakers were on the wrong feet.
Chris was 11 years old.
He wasn't prone to put his shoes on the wrong feet.
But if you were dressing a lifeless body, facing it, you would put right to left and left to right.
And that-- that's apparently what happened.
Now there were two crimes to solve, arson and murder.
East Farms Elementary School put together a memorial for Christopher.
And they invited all of us to go, and it was here, and they gave me this book that they had put together.
Christopher Wood's classmates and teachers assembled a collection of their favorite stories and recollections of Christopher, an expression the family appreciated.
Some of the poems, one of them in particular, it makes me cry every time I read it.
Investigators vowed to find the person or persons responsible for the murder and the arson.
I think the underlying feeling in the neighborhood that there was a predator, and that someone did abduct Chris Wood.
That was a big fear amongst the people.
We have a database of registered sex offenders, and they had searched that database and had discovered some people in the general area.
Since the autopsy revealed no evidence Christopher had been sexually assaulted, it was unlikely the crime was sexually motivated.
Christopher had been sexually assaulted, it was unlikely the crime was sexually motivated.
Investigators asked Bob Wood and his daughter Theresa about their activities on the morning of the fire.
Theresa said she left for school at 8 o'clock.
Bob said he left for work around 8:20.
And Christopher was eating breakfast.
He didn't normally leave for school until 8:30.
None of the neighbors reported seeing Christopher that morning.
Christopher that morning.
Investigators began to question Bob Wood's actions on the morning of the fire.
They remembered it took him a long time to get home after he learned about the fire.
It took him almost two hours to get home, and that would have been at most a 66-minute trip.
Question is, how was that accounted for?
And there was something else.
Investigators discovered that Bob was living well beyond his means.
He earned about $100,000 a year selling real estate, but he spent much more.
He also put in a huge garage in the back that would take an RV, and snow mobiles, and all his little hobbies he liked to do, restore cars.
And that was also in the back of the garage.
Investigators also learned that Bob had been fired from his job at a local real estate company a few weeks earlier.
Robert Wood had worked for them and had stolen over $100,000 worth of materials.
And they told us to be very alert that this may-- fire may be something he's intentionally setting for insurance purposes.
And Bob owned three life insurance policies on his son Christopher worth $80,000.
Well, Bob Wood gave a neighbor a briefcase, and in the briefcase were financial records, and there were life insurance policies on Chris and a picture of Chris.
None of those items were sooted, indicating that they had been removed from the house prior to the fire.
Wood was known for keeping meticulous financial records.
A clerk at a camera store called police to tell them how meticulous.
Bob had dropped off some film to be developed.
I believe it was the day after the fire.
And they were found to include photographs of the interior of his house, including before the fire and shots from the same angle after the fire.
A remarkable coincidence.
It was really stupid to have taken before and after photographs of his house on the same roll of film.
Investigators searched the Wood's garage for evidence.
On the fender of Bob's sports car, they discovered what appeared to be stomach contents.
They found similar stains in the back of the truck Bob was driving the day of the fire.
Bob was driving the day of the fire.
Unfortunately, scientists cannot get a DNA profile from stomach contents.
I knew that the fluids in the stomach would destroy DNA, at least I strongly suspected that, and a couple of quick phone calls confirmed that.
However, I ended up calling all over the country trying to find anybody that could tell me anything about the evidentiary value of vomit.
Investigators hoped that this biological material could tell them something.
Investigators hoped the stomach contents found in the back of Bob Wood's truck and on the fender of his sports car would tell them something about what happened to Christopher Wood.
So the samples were sent to forensic microscopy detective Bill Schneck, who examined the material with a polarized light microscope.
Bill Schneck, who examined the material with a polarized light microscope.
What I found were small, little vegetative fragments, oat bran, and flour particles, and starch grains.
From these patterns, Schneck suspected they were unprocessed corn and wheat starch.
To be certain, Schneck tested the samples with a solution of potassium iodine.
And when you put a small drop of this solution on the vomit materials, the starches will turn kind of a purple, purplish-blue color.
The test was positive.
Schneck knew that oat bran, corn, and wheat starch are common ingredients in breakfast cereals.
He found the same biological material on the shirt Christopher was wearing on the day of the fire.
Schneck found Marshmallow Mateys cereal in the Wood's kitchen, which is what Christopher's sister said he was eating on the morning he was killed.
After examining the vomit stains from the shirt, the truck, and the car, I concluded that they all were from the same source, and more than likely from the Marshmallow Mateys.
Investigators developed a theory about how Christopher's body was transported.
Christopher had been murdered in the morning, and Bob Wood's truck had an open bed.
So we knew that he had had to have concealed the body somehow.
We started looking for the garbage cans at his place and found that there was only one there.
Neighbors reported that he normally put two out on the curb.
So where was the missing trash can?
We spoke to Bob's daughter and found out that the day after the fire, he had taken his truck to a car wash and washed it, including spraying out the bed of the truck.
Near the car wash, investigators found a discarded trash can, the same type as the one missing from Bob's home.
But investigators had to be sure.
Schneck noticed what appeared to be paint residue on both trash cans.
Well, I examined the paint from the Rubbermaid garbage cans and found they contained titanium dioxide as one of the major inorganic ingredients.
And I compared that to the paint over-spray found on the garbage can at Robert Wood's house.
And I found the paint particles' composition was the same.
Schneck then used a scanning electron microscope to analyze what was inside the can.
He found traces of vomit consistent with Christopher's stomach contents, along with some shiny, metallic particles.
These particles matched the sequins on Christopher's backpack.
Well, after examining the contents and all the trace debris on Chris Wood's clothing and the material in the garbage can and in the backpack, I concluded that Chris Wood at one time was actually in the garbage can.
I concluded that Chris Wood at one time was actually in the garbage can.
Even with this information, investigators needed more evidence to tie Bob Wood to his son's murder.
They checked his cell phone records, which revealed Wood was near Christopher's body 50 miles from home when he was called about the fire.
50 miles from home when he was called about the fire.
In other words, it put him in the location where Chris was-- was jettisoned at about the time that Chris would have been jettisoned.
Finally, investigators had to determine if the smoke and fire seen by Wood's neighbors at 8:30 could have been created by a fire set just 10 minutes earlier at 8:20, the time Wood said he left the house.
Wood said he left the house.
The ATF purchased three sofas identical to the one in the Wood's home.
We wanted to see how the sofa would behave when exposed to fire.
How fast would this sofa become totally involved?
When would it reach its max heat release rate?
And how much energy would the sofa produce?
Given the size of the Wood's family room, the fire would have to generate at least 2,200 kilowatts of energy to engulf the room within a 10-minute period.
Tests showed the burning sofa would generate more than enough energy in that time frame.
Mr. Wood said that he left at 8:20.
Therefore, we concluded that Mr. Wood was present at the time the fire was started.
Bob Wood was arrested and charged with arson and first-degree murder.
It always amazes me that truth turns out to be stranger than fiction.
You know, this is the worst case of arson for profit that I have ever seen in my career.
While incarcerated, Bob Wood insisted he was innocent.
I would never do anything to hurt my son.
He was very special.
He was a good boy.
And he deserved to have a life.
He really did.
Yet his ex-girlfriend said Wood didn't always treat Christopher kindly.
Wood didn't always treat Christopher kindly.
He was really hard on Christopher.
And if Christopher did anything wrong, he would just immediately discipline him and just really lash out at him.
But with Theresa, she was his little girl.
So there's a-- to me there was a big disparity between how he treated the two.
Wood's excessive spending left him deep in debt.
Making matters worse, he was fired from his job for embezzling close to $100,000.
Prosecutors believed Bob killed Christopher for the $80,000 in life insurance.
On a cold, February morning, Wood waited until Theresa left for school, and then killed his son.
In the process, Christopher vomited, leaving behind the evidence which would later implicate his father.
Bob finished dressing Christopher, but he put Christopher's shoes on the wrong feet.
While carrying Christopher's body to his truck, Bob brushed against his sports car, inadvertently leaving his son's stomach contents on the fender.
Bob brushed against his sports car, inadvertently leaving his son's stomach contents on the fender.
He put his son's body in the trash can in the back of his truck.
Bob went back inside, set the sofa on fire, grabbed his son's backpack, and left the house at 8:20.
Bob dumped his son's body in a snow bank 50 miles from home, and here he received the cell phone call telling him of the fire.
On his drive back, Bob threw Christopher's backpack along the side of the road.
He washed his truck, but failed to remove all of the biological evidence.
And he discarded the trash can near the car wash.
The forensic paint analysis proved the discarded trash can was from Bob's home, and the biological evidence proved Christopher had been inside.
I really don't know why he killed him.
The insurance money wasn't enough to get him out of trouble on Christopher.
I do not know why, unless he was just absolutely pure evil.
Just before Wood was scheduled to go on trial, he hanged himself in his jail cell.
The closest Bob Wood ever came to confessing was discovered after he had killed himself.
We received a phone call from a psychic who said that she had visited with him in jail.
And he told her, at that time, that there were only three people who knew what happened to Christopher and that was him, Christopher, and God.
Schelle Kellogg rejected Bob Wood's wedding proposal just days before the arson and murder.
Some in law enforcement believe Schelle may have been the original target, but the break-up prevented it.
The cops do believe that if I would have married him, I would have been killed too.
I would have been killed too.
I don't know if that's true.
It's all speculation.
But they believe it would have been much worse.
Documents had been missing from my house, personal documents, Social Security information, Social Security card was missing.
Social Security information, Social Security card was missing.
Although Wood's suicide precluded the trial, prosecutors believe they would have won a conviction.
Forensic scientists are amazing.
I've been doing this for 20-plus years, and there's always something new that they bring to this-- to a case.
There's a lot of personal, you know, pleasure involved in helping to solve a crime.
Of course, I'm one small piece of a larger puzzle.
But in this particular case, I think a lot of the work I did was, you know, very important.
I feel pretty good about that.
There were no witnesses to-- to see Christopher's body being pulled out of the house.
There were no witnesses to his body being dumped down an embankment.
It was science, basically, that solved this case.
And yeah, I mean, that's fascinating stuff.
One man's fascination with ladies of the evening terrorized a community.
Had it not been for his arrogance, an old running shoe, and an unusual bullet fragment, he might never have been caught.
Farming is big business in Bakersfield, California.
The area boasts warm weather, flat terrain, and a sophisticated canal system for irrigation.
In 1986, some hikers found evidence of a crime in one of those canals.
It was the decomposed body of a young woman.
I thought it was possible that the body had been dumped into the canal further up, and it had floated down to the place where it was discovered.
The body had been in the water for several days, and any trace evidence had been washed away.
No physical evidence other than the clothing that she was wearing when the body was retrieved.
An autopsy left no doubt.
She had been murdered.
There were multiple gunshot wounds that were discovered.
One, the bullet was recovered from the spine, from the spinal canal.
And the other one, the bullet was recovered from the chest wall.
The bullets were from a .38 caliber pistol.
And these two bullets we recovered, but there was one hole.
So both of those bullets entered through the same hole.
And that would lead me to believe that it was a type of an assassination going on here.
Decomposition made visual identification impossible, so the medical examiner relied on her fingerprints.
You can use the dusting powder, like they use for picking up latent fingerprints, and the prints can be developed that way.
Her fingerprints were compared to thousands on file in the California State database, and there was a match.
The victim was 21-year-old Kay Bradley, who had an earlier arrest for prostitution.
A background check revealed she had grown up in Los Angeles, was an A student in school, an accomplished horseback rider and dancer.
Her aunt, who asked not to be identified, said Kay was destined for success.
She was very artistic and loved to sing, loved to dance as a child, and never misbehaved.
I don't think she was ever grounded or punished.
She was always very close to her family.
In the years after high school, Kay made some unfortunate choices.
Kay made some unfortunate choices.
A young girl that had become involved with the wrong crowd, with drugs, and which led to her being involved with certain people that were not really what I would say the type of people I would want my daughter to hang out with.
I would want my daughter to hang out with.
The whole family was devastated, because you try to figure out how this could happen, or why this happened, or if someone was responsible.
Prostitution may have been how Kay financed her drug habit.
Unfortunately, none of the other Bakersfield prostitutes recalled seeing her around the time she disappeared.
After several months and hundreds of interviews, the trail of Kay's killer turned cold, but investigators didn't give up.
Eventually, they got a break, but it came with a price, when the body of a second young woman was found in the very same canal.
And at that point, you start thinking maybe it's a serial killer.
Maybe there's something in the calendar or something or the moon that causes a person to-- to do this.
One year after the murder of Kay Bradley, the body of a second young woman was discovered in the same irrigation canal on the outskirts of Bakersfield, California.
She appeared to be a teenager, but there was no identification on the body.
Which is one of the hardest ones in homicide to work.
The autopsy revealed the girl was killed by three shots from a .38 caliber weapon.
She received several wounds from the right front and was down.
And while she was down, the final shot would have been the one in the back.
On the cement curbing of the canal, we noticed that there was more blood.
And so in reading the crime scene, we know that the vehicle pulled off, parked on the shoulder, that there was some activity.
The victim was hurt.
The victim was bleeding.
We're assuming that it was the victim's blood.
And somebody, in the end, dragged the victim over to the canal and pushed her in.
Police found three different shoe impressions in the soft dirt near the canal.
They were identified as Adidas brand running shoes.
Forensic expert Greg Laskowski analyzed the bullets from the victim's body, specifically, for lands and grooves created when the bullet passes through the barrel.
These are unique to every gun.
He compared them to the bullets recovered from Kay Bradley.
They lined up perfectly.
The bullets from the first homicide victim and the bullets from the second homicide victim had the same class characteristics.
That is, they had the same caliber, same make, and type.
They also had rifling characteristics on the them that were identical.
The murder weapon was a Colt .38 caliber handgun.
I'm very familiar with those because I own one myself.
The ammunition was unusual too.
They were a lighter weight caliber than normal .38 calibers at the time.
There were 110-grain, semi-jacketed, hollow points, which are typical of law enforcement ammunition.
It did occur to me at that time, again, we're possibly looking for someone in law enforcement, security work, a prison guard, that type of thing.
Because the perpetrator hadn't disposed of that weapon.
They kept it.
The first task facing investigators was to identify the young girl.
Her description didn't match anyone listed in missing persons reports.
And her fingerprints didn't match any on file with the California State database.
Since there was a condom wrapper near the victim's body, and because of the way she was dressed, investigators suspected she was working as a prostitute.
We started showing this Polaroid photograph of our victim's face.
And on that first night that we were out there, we actually, by luck, found this prostitute who recognized the photograph.
I think she was here-- And she said that she recalled seeing the victim.
And she said that she recalled seeing the victim.
She was identified as 15-year-old Tracy Clark, a runaway from Seattle, Washington.
Tracy's friend, a fellow prostitute, last saw her leaving with a customer driving an unusual vehicle.
She seen Tracy Clark get into this vehicle, and that was the last time she was seen alive.
She described this vehicle as a light-colored pickup truck with a camper shell with bubble windows on the side.
But there were thousands of similar trucks in California.
But the murder weapon, the type used by law enforcement, was a definite clue.
On a hunch, Bakersfield Police looked inside their own community and discovered one of their colleagues owned a pickup truck matching that description.
It belonged to Sheriff's Deputy Dave Rogers.
Ironically, Rogers was Detective Soliz's former partner.
We worked side by side for, I don't know, I'm guessing, you know, two or three years on the same beat.
He would back me up on calls, and I would back him up.
We would have coffee together.
Deputy Rogers, an 11-year veteran of the force, was well liked and highly respected.
To see if Rogers' truck was the one Tracy got in to, investigators tried an unusual experiment.
I went and picked up the witness.
And I told her, I'm going to take you for a drive, and I want you to see if you recognize any vehicles.
Investigator Lage showed her a number of similar-looking vehicles in Bakersfield.
But the one she identified was the one parked outside Deputy Rogers' house.
She immediately started hollering, that's the truck, that's the truck.
Go arrest him.
Go arrest him.
And I says, are you sure?
And she said, I'm positive.
When questioned, Rogers denied any involvement in the murders.
His service revolver, a Smith & Wesson .357 Magnum, was clearly not the murder weapon, and there was no record Rogers ever owned a Colt .38 caliber handgun.
Both investigators and prosecutors needed much more than just their suspicions that Rogers was somehow involved.
My job is to present enough evidence to satisfy the standard of beyond a reasonable doubt.
There's a jury instruction on what reasonable doubt is.
And it's not just any doubt, but it's not beyond any doubt.
It's just a reasonable doubt.
That is, it really couldn't be anybody else but this man.
Bakersfield detectives had two unsolved murders, a suspect who was a member of law enforcement, but little else.
So investigators went back to the witness who saw the second victim, Tracy Clark, getting into a light-colored truck and asked her if she could identify the driver.
They showed her a photographic lineup consisting of six individuals.
I advised the witness that I was going to show her a series of photographs that she may or may not recognize.
Don't be afraid to say that you don't recognize anybody.
You don't have to.
It didn't take long.
She said that's the guy that drove that pickup truck that I seen Tracy get into the last time she was seen alive.
And she pointed to Rogers.
It was Rogers.
At that point, I didn't quite soak in.
Like, you know, I can't believe that we're looking at a deputy on the murder of two prostitutes.
Deputy Dave Rogers once again denied any involvement in the murders.
Since these were his colleagues, Rogers may have felt more comfortable during his interrogation than others would, and he did something consistent with that.
He put his foot up on the desk.
And Detective Mike Lage remembered something.
And I looked down and looked over, and there was the shoe tracks, the shoe that resembled the shoe tracks that was taken at Tracy Clark's scene.
Was it possible that Rogers, an experienced law enforcement officer, would wear the same shoes to a murder interrogation he wore to commit the crime?
Detectives sent Rogers' shoes to forensic analyst Greg Laskowski.
Laskowski.
There was the center logo, which identified the shoe as being Adidas, and the overall size of the shoe was consistent.
But there was a chunk out in the tread pattern.
Laskowski pressed the tread pattern of Rogers' shoe into a mixture of fingerprint powder, Comet cleanser, and very fine clay.
Comet cleanser, and very fine clay.
And sure enough, Laskowski saw the same tread patterns and same nicks and indentations in Rogers' shoe impression that he saw in the impressions found at the crime scene.
I was astounded to be able to identify David Roger's shoe as having been at the crime scene.
Roger's shoe as having been at the crime scene.
But to prosecutor Sara Ryals, it wasn't enough.
I mean, you can put the three scoops of ice cream, and then that's fine, but it's not a banana split.
But you've got to add the bananas.
You've got to add the whipped cream and the cherry.
The whipped cream and the cherry are the fluff.
They're what makes it look good.
The bananas are what makes the case.
In the back of Rogers' truck, police found dozens of pairs of women's underwear, nude pictures of prostitutes, and a .38 caliber Colt revolver.
That was just unbelievable.
It-- you couldn't put words what one was thinking at that point.
It's-- it's as if, is this really all true?
Is this a coincidence?
To see if it was the murder weapon, it was fired into a water-filled tank to stop the bullet.
It slows down the bullet.
And relatively quickly, within a matter of 1 to 2 feet, the bullet falls harmlessly to the bottom of the tank where it can be collected.
A comparison of that bullet and those found at both crime scenes left no doubt that this gun was used in both murders.
Now, Sara Ryals was satisfied.
You know, it was all so clear then.
Once we had all that laid out.
I mean, there was nothing else it could be.
And it was extremely important.
And from the serial number, investigators discovered the gun was registered to the owner of a local diner.
Interestingly, several years earlier, Deputy Rogers had investigated a burglary call at that same diner.
Behind the cash register was the owner's Colt .38 caliber pistol.
Colt .38 caliber pistol.
Apparently, Rogers stole it.
It was Rogers went in there and picked that thing up and put it in his pocket.
And he wrote down the theft report on it.
And he had that gun ever since, and he used it to kill two human beings with.
So that, yeah, that made me angry.
Dave Rogers was arrested and charged with two counts of first-degree murder.
When Dave Rogers was identified and arrested, I was angry.
I was shocked.
You know, I trusted him with my life.
You know?
Who knows, you know, for whatever reason, you know, I could've been the victim.
I could've been the victim.
I mean, those kind of crazy thoughts, at one point in time, went through my head.
Once in custody, he offered some chilling insights into why a seemingly-normal family man could not control his compulsion to kill.
My-- my head goes crazy. It spins.
You know what I mean?
I get to thinking about something-- and it-- and it keeps going and going and going.
The citizens of Bakersfield were shocked to learn that a law enforcement officer was charged for the murder of 21-year-old Kay Bradley and 15-year-old Tracy Clark.
Bradley and 15-year-old Tracy Clark.
Dave Rogers' wife had difficulty believing it.
Great family man, um, great human being.
And this was the Dave Rogers that I knew.
It's hard to imagine that a guy like that is a killer and, presumably, a pretty cold-blooded killer.
But the forensic evidence was overwhelming.
When it came to trial, this case was not a "who done it."
The question was, what motivated this defendant?
And what was his degree of guilt?
What was his state of mind at the time of the killing?
In a taped interview with the prison psychologist, Rogers admitted soliciting prostitutes.
Rogers admitted soliciting prostitutes.
I'm not prejudiced.
I have solicited blacks.
I have solicited whites.
I have solicited Mexicans.
Well, that sounds so formal when you say solicit.
Well, that's what I've done, you know.
I've gone out and solicited prostitutes.
And eventually, Rogers admitted taking Tracy Clark to the canal.
He claimed the two had a disagreement.
She made some comment to him that, I've been here too long.
Now you have to give me more money, or something like that.
I don't think she called me a queer or a faggot or something like that, but I think she brought up me having different sexual preferences.
Rogers claimed he threw Tracy out of the truck, but that she stood in front of it and refused to move.
He also claimed she threatened to file a police report.
What are going to-- He was making it sound like a self-defense, because he claimed that Tracy Clark was screaming and hollering and scratching him and that sort of thing at the-- at the scene.
He was making it sound like a self-defense, because he claimed that Tracy Clark was screaming and hollering and scratching him and that sort of thing at the-- at the scene.
Rogers' mistake was getting out of the truck to drag Tracy's body into the canal, leaving his shoe impressions in the soft dirt.
His second mistake was wearing those same shoes to his interrogation.
As luck would have it, for us, as the investigators, that he was careless.
He was very careless, and he left a lot of evidence at the scene.
He left evidence in his truck.
He left evidence at home.
Rogers had no explanation for why he killed his first victim, Kay Bradley.
Ah, he made a comment, if they did match my gun, then I must have done it.
But I don't remember.
Rogers claimed his actions were caused by parents who emotionally and physically abused him as a child.
You know, to say that he was some sort of really nice guy who was just reacting to his childhood, just kind of makes you want to throw up.
Rogers also hinted he welcomed the death penalty.
I-- I can't deal with having killed this other person.
I do not believe I should live.
I'm not-- Are you saying, though, in some ways, you-- you plotted your own demise?
Are you saying, though, in some ways, you-- you plotted your own demise?
I just gave them what they needed.
So you knew you-- you had a plan?
Dave Rogers went on trial for the murder of Kay Bradley and Tracy Clark.
It took the jury two days to find him guilty.
He was sentenced to death.
Juries like to be able to figure out things for themselves.
They like to play-- not play detective, but play detective story writer, in which they have a lot of clues, and they can put them together, and say, this can only be this man.
As far as I'm concerned, he's as worthless as a-- as there is.
But he'll probably outlive me.
He's sucking my air, and I'm paying for his room and board up there as a taxpayer.
Well, I think that this case, the thing that really comes to my mind is how he really led that double life, how he seemed to be one thing and was accepted as that respectable law enforcement officer.
And yet at night, like Jekyll and Hyde, he'd go out and have a completely different side.
And how he seemed to have fooled everybody in his life until the criminalists and the forensics caught up with him.
The last time anyone saw Betty Lee alive, she was talking on a telephone.
The next day, her body was found in the New Mexico desert.
The forensic evidence revealed there were two perpetrators who left the scene and drove off into the desert.
A discarded cell phone revealed why.
These 25,000 square miles of high desert are called the Four Corners, where Utah, Colorado, Arizona and New Mexico meet.
Utah, Colorado, Arizona and New Mexico meet.
It's home to America's largest Native American population, including the Navajo, Hopi, Ute, and the Jicarilla Apaches.
There is some violent crime in these parts, but not a lot.
So it was a surprise in June of 2000 when an electrical worker saw blood on a remote stretch of road.
A short distance away in the bushes was the body of a young woman It was quite obvious when I saw the body that we had a homicide.
It was quite obvious when I saw the body that we had a homicide.
And a-- and a very brutal one at that.
A knife and a sledgehammer were found in the brush nearby.
The victim was identified as 36-year-old Betty Lee from Shiprock, New Mexico, about 30 miles away.
Betty was a Native American, a Navajo, divorced with five children.
She had been going to school to become a nurse.
My Aunt Betty was a very happy person.
She loved everything about life.
I mean, her kids were her number one priority and then school.
And that was why she was back in school was to make life better for them.
Two years earlier, another Native American, Donald Tsosie, was found stabbed and beaten to death in the desert just 10 miles away.
Tsosie, was found stabbed and beaten to death in the desert just 10 miles away.
Police feared a serial killer might be on the loose.
At Betty Lee's autopsy, the medical examiner found numerous stab wounds to her chest.
As well as blunt force trauma to the head.
Death would be quick.
Not necessarily instantaneous, but it would be quickly.
It appeared that the sledgehammer and knife found near her body were the murder weapons.
There were no signs of sexual assault.
Toxicology tests showed some alcohol in her system, but not a lot.
She had some alcohol on board, but wouldn't necessarily be so impaired that she couldn't defend herself or do something else.
The alcohol was a potential lead.
A quick check of the local bars indicated Betty Lee spent her last night in a place called The Turnaround.
Betty Lee spent her last night in a place called The Turnaround.
She was with two of her friends, Tina and Gloria.
According to witnesses, there were two men drinking with them.
One was named Johnny Miller.
And the second guy, we never learned his first name; however, his last name was Pretty Boy.
Eventually, the two man asked two of the women if they wanted to continue the party somewhere else.
Gloria and Tina decide to leave the bar Johnny Miller and Pretty Boy and go to a motel room.
And Betty-- at this time, it made it Betty Lee almost a third wheel.
Witnesses said Betty pleaded with their friends not to leave since she didn't have a ride home.
But the foursome left anyway in a red pickup truck.
And they say that Betty Lee was chasing after Johnny Miller's red Dually pickup and screaming at them and begging them not to leave her at the bar.
From there, she walked to a convenience store and used the pay phone.
Betty called the Shiprock Dispatch Center where she asked the dispatcher to contact her brother, who is a Navajo Nation police officer.
But her call didn't go through.
A witness said she hung up the phone and cried.
When the witness looked again, Betty was gone.
Investigators wanted to know what happened from the time she made that telephone call to when she was murdered in the desert.
While investigating the murder of Betty Lee, police search for two women who were with Betty the night before at The Turnaround Bar and had left with the two men.
Police were able to corroborate their alibis.
The foursome had checked into a nearby motel, where they had remained until morning.
Investigators hoped forensic evidence at Betty Lee's murder scene would point them in the right direction.
I had been on some homicide cases prior to this.
At this point in time, this was the most extensive and the most horrific I had seen.
After dusting both the sledgehammer and the knife, there were no fingerprints on either one so that was a dead end.
Not far from Betty Lee's body were some tire tracks and some shoe impressions.
Both were revealing.
The shoe impressions told investigators there were two killers.
One wore men's boots, size 13.
The other wore Converse brand basketball shoes, size 10.
The third set of shoe prints were the victim's sandals.
The tire impressions near the body were the size found on a car, not a truck.
Yet, there were three different tires.
I've not seen a vehicle with three kinds of treads like that before.
It's the only one I've ever seen.
It may happen, but I haven't seen it.
The three different tire impressions led away from the crime scene down the road a short distance, then turned off, heading into the desert.
I wanted to find out where them tracks were leading, and why were they out there?
Because at times, you might have more than one crime scene, too.
There was always that possibility.
There might have been another crime scene out there.
Police decided to follow the tracks, having no idea where they would lead.
The trail went on and on, deeper and deeper into the desert.
At times, we noticed that the tracks crisscrossed each other, so we'd have to take time and figure out what direction we wanted to go because they overlapped each other.
We weren't even 100% positive that this was a vehicle that was directly related to this homicide.
We were just following tracks that led out of the crime scene.
At times, it was difficult to decipher.
Where are these tracks leading, why are they here.
Over the next three or four hours, we followed tracks.
And when we lost them, we'd get out, walk, look for them.
Pick them up again, drive some more until we lost them again.
And this went on for mile after mile after mile.
And then, the trail stopped.
Nearby were tire impressions from several different vehicles.
Apparently, there had been some sort of meeting.
It was obvious the vegetation had been tore up.
There was ruts in there.
The sand was tore up.
And then I started picking up several different shoe impressions.
One was a smooth sole.
It might have been a western boot.
About 20 yards away, they found another extraordinary piece of evidence.
A cell phone.
I've lived in the area my entire life.
That's something that's very uncommon is coming across cellphones out in the middle of nowhere.
The cellphone looked fresh.
I mean, there was no dust on it.
There was no rain spatter compared to the bottles and trash that was in the area.
Was is it possible that the cell phone belonged to the killer?
From the phone company, police identified its owner as a tow truck driver, Charlie Bergin.
I got a call from the sheriff's department asking me why my cell phone was laying near this dead body, you know, out there in the middle of nowhere?
You think, oh my gosh, I'm going to be arrested for murder.
Bergin insisted he knew nothing about any murder.
But he said he could explain the four sets of tire tracks in the sand.
According to Bergin, a car got stuck in the sand the night before.
The owner called his father, who arrived in a pickup truck, and the pickup truck got stuck too.
They called for a tow truck, and it got stuck.
Finally, the tow truck driver called Charlie Bergin, and he pulled them all out.
I've been doing this a long time, 17 years of it.
And you see people do some really stupid things.
People have weird ways.
It's none of my business what they do.
I just go on and towed them out and did my thing.
Investigators could hardly believe it.
But what was Bergin's phone doing in the sand?
While I was pulling them out, my phone rings.
Cell phone reception here is not very good.
Couldn't hear a word she was saying, it was my wife.
It kind of pisses me off, so I just throw the phone away.
No big deal.
Investigators were now faced with a dilemma.
Either Charlie Bergin had just told one of the biggest lies they'd ever heard, or he had come face-to-face with Betty Lee's killers.
36-year-old Betty Lee, the single mother of five young children, had been murdered in the New Mexico desert.
The tire tracks found at the crime scene led police on a journey several miles into the desert where, apparently, the vehicle got stuck.
Charlie Bergin, a tow truck driver, told police he was called to the scene to pull the vehicles from the sand and was paid for his services with a check.
It was signed by 31-year-old Bobby Fry, a construction worker who had a police record.
He seemed nervous in a-- kind of a weird way.
Not really nervous, just didn't want us in the vehicle, I guess you could say.
I guess you could say.
I don't know why he didn't want us in that vehicle.
I-- I don't understand that.
Bergin said Bobby Fry was driving the car.
And we're headed off to Bobby Fry's house.
This is something that needs immediate attention.
If there's any evidence, we're going to-- we need to get to his house and preservative it, if there is any.
When questioned about the incident, Bobby Fry confirmed that his car got stuck in the desert and that he called his father to help pull him out.
Bobby Fry confirmed that his car got stuck in the desert and that he called his father to help pull him out.
But he denied having anything to do with Betty Lee's murder.
And he willingly allowed police to search his home.
I remember walking in to Robert Fry's bedroom and thinking, oh my gosh, there's-- there was an enormous pile of clothes.
There was stuff scattered everywhere.
The room was in total disarray.
And I remember thinking, I have to go through this entire room with a fine tooth comb.
In the pile of clothes, investigators found a black t-shirt and a pair of size 13 boots.
The same size as the impressions found at the crime scene.
Bobby Fry said his friend, Les Engh, was with him the night before.
In Engh's home, police confiscated his clothes and a pair of Converse brand basketball shoes, size 10.
The same size as the impression found at the crime scene.
The clothing and the murder weapons, the knife and sledgehammer, went to Rod Englert, an expert in blood spatter analysis.
He examined Bobby Fry's shirt.
Under enhanced lighting, Englert noticed tiny blood droplets.
The size and shape indicated medium impact blood spatter.
He found the same size and shape blood droplets on Bobby Fry's boots.
To Englert, this told a story.
It was consistent with him being the one that had the sledgehammer and hitting Betty Lee with it as she lay on the ground.
There were no fingerprints on either the sledgehammer and the knife, who would tell us who was actually handling the sledgehammer or who was handling the knife.
But Rod Englert found another way to prove who was handling the sledgehammer.
Under a microscope, Englert discovered tiny traces of sand and blood deeply embedded in the shoulder of Bobby Fry's shirt.
Englert said there was only one way this could have happened.
And that is consistent with placing the sledgehammer with the handle over one shoulder with the sand and the blood, and carrying that 10-pound weight on the shoulder.
That is my opinion as to what occurred after she was hit with the sledgehammer.
That one casually walks off carrying the hammer on the shoulder.
As for Les Engh, there was no blood whatsoever on his clothing, and no blood spatter on his shoes.
But there was a blood transfer pattern.
It looked as if Les Engh carried Betty Lee's body into the brush, but he wasn't nearby when she was killed.
So you're able to eliminate and exclude, by the evidence, the participation of Leslie Engh in the killing of Betty Lee.
DNA testing of the blood on Bobby Fry's clothing and shoes and Les Engh's shoes confirmed that it was Betty Lee's blood.
We found Betty Lee's blood in the vehicle itself.
And in fact, we found an earring-- or the police found an earring in Robert Fry's vehicle that matched up to the earring Betty Lee's body had after she was murdered.
And finally, the tire impressions found at the crime scene matched the tires on Bobby Fry's car.
Bobby Fry and Les Engh were both arrested and charged with first-degree murder.
But investigators still didn't understand the motive.
When confronted with the overwhelming amount of forensic evidence, Bobby Fry denied he was involved.
But Les Engh confessed.
You guys, don't leave me behind, here.
How am I going to get home?
On the night of the murder, Betty Lee found herself without a ride home when her friends left the bar with two men.
Betty Lee found herself without a ride home when her friends left the bar with two men.
And she wasn't able to find anyone to give her a ride home.
According to Les Engh, Bobby Fry was angry that night.
He had gotten into a bar fight earlier and was looking for trouble.
That's when they saw Betty Lee crying near the pay phone.
Along the way, Fry stopped the car, pulled Betty out and tried to rape her.
But Betty put up a fight.
In anger, Fry stabbed her repeatedly with his knife.
Then took a sledgehammer from the car and beat her to death.
Blood splatter landed on Fry's shoes and shirt.
Sand and blood on Fry's shoulder proved he disposed of the sledgehammer after the murder.
Both men carried Betty's body into the bushes creating the blood transfer pattern on Les Engh's shoes.
The two left the murder weapons at the scene, along with their shoe and tire prints.
Their trail led into the desert, where they planned to do some joyriding, but they ran into trouble.
In a colossal blunder, Fry's car got stuck in the sand.
He called his father, who also got stuck.
They called a tow truck and it got stuck too.
Ultimately, it was Charlie Bergin who got them out.
Had it not been for Charlie Bergin's cell phone, that he threw in anger when his wife called while he was pulling the cars out of the sand, police might never have solved the case.
You know, when I got that call that day from my wife, I thought, oh God, what does she want this time?
You know, just called me up to bug me all the time.
But it was probably the best phone call I'd ever got in my life.
Robert Fry was tried and convicted of first-degree murder and sentenced to death.
Les Engh testified against him and received a 40-year sentence.
Bobby Fry was later convicted of three other murders, including that of Donald Tsosie, the Native American whose body was discovered two years earlier just 10 miles away from where Betty Lee was murdered.
Betty Lee's family members are grateful for the work of law enforcement and the forensic evidence that identified her killers.
We really appreciate their efforts in bringing justice to her murder.
Betty Lee did not deserve to die.
And no one deserves to die in such a horrible terrifying manner.
This was one of the worst situations you can even imagine for a woman's last moments on Earth.
It's-- it's horrible.
A memorial now sits on the site of Betty Lee's murder.
A reminder not only of a life senselessly lost, but the scientific investigation that put her killers behind bars.
The evidence at the scene, as well as the evidence we recovered on follow-up made the difference in this case.
The physical evidence is always the most important factor in the trial process if it's available.
Physical evidence doesn't lie.
Forensic science was huge, the way everything from the blood spatter interpretation, the DNA, the footwear evidence, the tire evidence, it was huge.
Forensic evidence solved this case.
A young mother mysteriously died just hours after dining in an upscale restaurant.
The search for clues revealed secrets hidden in an attic, an upscale gentleman's club, and underneath the young woman's skin.
Shortly after midnight, police in a wealthy Philadelphia suburb received a frantic 911 call.
34-year-old Craig Rabinowitz said he had just found his wife, Stephanie, in the bathtub.
When police arrived, they found Rabinowitz in the bathroom holding his wife's head above the water.
They performed CPR, and rushed her to the hospital.
Unfortunately, there was nothing doctors could do.
When Craig learned of his wife's death, he collapsed in grief.
Doctors had no explanation.
I asked the doctor, you know, help me out here.
What do you think happened?
And he said, he really didn't know.
He told me, some time people die for unexplained reasons.
Could have been an aneurysm, a heart attack, whatever.
But on first glance, there wasn't any sign of trauma.
Rabinowitz told police that he and his wife, Stephanie, had dinner at a Thai restaurant, came home, had a drink.
Stephanie, had dinner at a Thai restaurant, came home, had a drink.
Then Stephanie took a bath while Craig said he watched television.
And while he was watching the hockey game, he heard a thump, which he attributed to the shampoo bottle falling on the floor in the bathroom.
He didn't think much of it.
He watched the hockey game for approximately 20 to 30 minutes, and realized, hey, his wife hasn't come back to the bedroom from the bath.
So he went into the bathroom, and found her unconscious in the bathtub.
Detective Charles Craig had investigated many unusual deaths before.
And a spouse with something to hide would usually act suspiciously, but not Craig Rabinowitz.
Generally when we interview people, witnesses, victims, suspects, we look to see if they have eye contact with us, see if they're shaking, or they're very nervous, or if they're perspiring.
And he didn't exhibit any of those signs.
And police found nothing suspicious or out of place in the couple's home after Stephanie's death.
TV was on.
The shampoo bottle was in the bathroom.
There was water in the bathtub.
We checked all the doors and windows, and found that the house was secure.
We went through the master bedroom.
Didn't appear to have any signs of a struggle.
We didn't find blood, or anything of that nature.
Craig and Stephanie were a classic love story.
They had been together since they first met in summer camp as teenagers.
The Rabinowitzes were the perfect couple, in love, with good jobs.
They had a beautiful young daughter, a year old.
He had a business of his own, selling latex gloves and supplies.
They had been married since 1990.
She was a lawyer, Bryn Mawr and Temple University educated.
Craig was proud of his wife, and worked hard to put her through law school.
Stephanie spoke about her marriage in very idyllic terms.
I mean, she thought she had a wonderful relationship, almost a perfect relationship in that, and she was extremely happy.
Between her law practice and his business, they were very affluent, and lived in the exclusive mainline section of Philadelphia.
But even wealth and privilege can't prevent unfortunate incidents like the one that befell Stephanie Rabinowitz.
I came to the office Wednesday morning.
I walked in and everyone was crying, and I was shocked to hear that Stephanie had died Tuesday night.
I heard that she had an accident, that she drowned in a bathtub.
That's all we were told.
But why had Stephanie drowned?
Was it caused by something she ate, medication, was she depressed?
Forensic investigators needed to find out more.
The cause of Stephanie Rabinowitz's death was a mystery.
Stephanie Rabinowitz may have slipped, hit her head in the tub, subsequently drowned.
It was a real tragedy.
A mother of a one-year-old child, devoted husband, happy family life.
I mean, I was at a loss as to how she could have died.
I didn't see any type of drama, any cuts, any abrasions, any of that type of thing.
Stephanie came from a religious Jewish family.
In accordance with her religion, Stephanie's parents and her husband Craig wanted to bury her before the next sundown.
There was a push to have Stephanie Rabinowitz buried quickly under Jewish custom.
But the coroner overruled the family's wishes, saying he wanted to perform a complete autopsy.
His action was prompted in part by something Craig Rabinowitz told police.
Craig Rabinowitz told police.
He said Stephanie was having trouble adjusting to the demands of caring for their new baby and her work as a lawyer, and she occasionally took a prescription sleep medication.
In the meantime, a tipster called police, suggesting they investigate Craig's involvement in a gentleman's club named Delilah's Den.
Delilah's Den is the upscale strip club in Philadelphia.
It's a place where it's not uncommon to see a lot of professional athletes or entertainers, or people who visit Philadelphia from out of town, businesspeople, and just groups of guys out to have a beer or for a bachelor party to show up at the Delilah's Den.
When detectives visited the club, they discovered Craig was a regular customer, and that his interest was primarily in only one dancer, named Summer.
Employees said this wasn't unusual.
Well, Summer didn't come dance at clubs to make friends.
Like, she was definitely there to make money.
And she was sort of known as something of a shark, like she was always a big moneymaker, she always went after the like customers that appeared to have the most money.
You can either be entertaining on stage, and make it real clear to the customers that we're going to have a good time while you're here, but the fun ends at the door.
Or you can sort of draw the customers into this like longer, drawn out fantasy, and develop regular customers.
When interviewed, Summer admitted that Craig was a good customer-- but strictly that, a customer, and not even her best one.
They would each have two or three good customers who would spend a lot of money on them, even buying them furnishings for their house, or paying repair bills, or doing dental work, that type of thing.
She said there was no sexual relationship between the two of them, that they weren't dating, or anything of that nature.
We were always suspicious of that, of course.
I know dancers who have gotten cars from their customers, other elaborate gifts of jewelry, um, you know, apartments, et cetera.
Delilah's customers who want something a little cozier can get private dances in the champagne room.
They use Delilah's Dollars, house money bought with credit cards.
Club records indicated Craig was spending as much as $3,000 a week at Delilah's-- a lot of money, perhaps, but certainly not illegal.
In fact, Craig's visits too Delilah's were not unknown to Stephanie Rabinowitz.
I think he had really told her that he did business there.
And that is not an uncommon thing to see in any city with people who are doing business, especially something like sales.
Whether Craig's interest in Delilah's was professional or personal, it certainly didn't explain Stephanie's death.
That would have to come from the forensic accountants.
In the 12 months before his wife's death, Craig Rabinowitz spent almost $100,000 in Delilah's Den, an upscale gentleman's club in Philadelphia.
Craig Rabinowitz spent almost $100,000 in Delilah's Den, an upscale gentleman's club in Philadelphia.
Investigators searched the Rabinowitzs' home for financial records, interested to know how Rabinowitz could afford this kind of spending.
Rabinowitz could afford this kind of spending.
He was a latex glove salesman, but nobody could really find a lot of latex gloves.
But detectives did find a hidden crawl space in the bedroom closet.
So basically I just lifted up the board covering the crawl space, looked around, didn't see anything, but felt around the top of the crawl space, and found this bag.
And it turned out to be a shopping bag filled with a lot of paperwork.
The paperwork included credit card receipts for Delilah's Den, hotel receipts, and gifts he had purchased for his favorite stripper.
There was also pornography.
Basically, Craig Rabinowitz's double life was squirreled away in the crawl space of the top of his home.
The bag contained pawn shop tickets proving Craig pawned Stephanie's heirloom jewelry just after she died.
The bag also contained an accounting ledger, possibly for Craig's surgical gloves business.
But investigators weren't sure.
They brought a forensic accountant, which I'd never been involved with before.
And he uh, very thoroughly and systematically went through every bill that Rabinowitz had.
Ric Zayas is an expert at finding the real cost or value in accounting records that have been written in a way to hide their true meaning.
He was describing importing containers of these latex gloves from overseas, that the cost of a container would be $20,000 or $22,000 per container, that he was then going to be able to sell those containers for twice that amount.
That was the pitch.
Sounds too good to be true.
It was too good to be true.
Zayas discovered that Craig's latex glove distribution company had never bought or sold a single glove.
The only money coming into the company was funds from investors, Craig's family and friends whom he was scamming with a Ponzi or pyramid scheme.
So the money from investor two was now going back repay investor one, and just keeping that cycle running.
And Zayas learned that Craig paid no office or warehouse rent anywhere in Philadelphia.
The closest thing Craig had to an office was his seat at Delilah's strip club.
When his family, when his wife, when his friends, when his in-laws thought he was out making sales calls for his latex glove business, at least one, two, three days a week, Craig Rabinowitz was in dark, air conditioned strip club in a back room, getting couch dances and lap dances by a 24-year-old stripper.
Zayas estimated Craig was in debt to the tune of $800,000.
He owed most of it to his shareholders, who had invested in his non-existent business, and who wanted their money back at some point with a profit.
Apparently, not even Stephanie knew what was going on.
Of all the people that Craig conned, quite clearly uh, he-- he conned Stephanie the most.
And the forensic accounting identified a possible motive for murder.
On the In side of the handwritten ledger, were amounts that corresponded to the life insurance policies on Stephanie, including $1.5 million worth, which Craig had just purchased.
The Out side of the ledger listed the amount owed to each of Craig's investors.
He made small, token payments to pacify them, and through a series of financial calculations, Zayas was able to tell when they were made.
Zayas was able to tell when they were made.
They were only accurate for a limited period of time during the middle part of April of 1997, leading to an inference that the document was prepared about two weeks before Stephanie Rabinowitz was murdered.
Craig Rabinowitz, it was very apparent to the investigators at that time, had literally done an accounting of the value of killing his wife.
The insurance payout not only would have eliminated Craig's debt, but also allowed him to continue his extravagant relationship with Summer, and still not have to work for a living.
Craig's debt, but also allowed him to continue his extravagant relationship with Summer, and still not have to work for a living.
All of this showed motive, but if the medical examiner didn't rule Stephanie's death a homicide, it was salacious, but little else.
After Stephanie Rabinowitz's death, her family wanted a quick burial, in accordance with their religious customs.
But it was Dr. Ian Hood who overruled that request, in order to perform a full autopsy.
And almost immediately, that decision paid big dividends.
The first clue was the food found in Stephanie's stomach.
We know she very recently ingested a meal.
In this case, shrimp and bean sprouts were quite clearly seen with very little digestion having occurred in the stomach contents.
So she obviously died probably within an hour or two of ingesting that meal.
That meant Stephanie died around 10:30 PM.
But Craig didn't call 911 until after midnight.
Dr. Hood also discovered small bruises on Stephanie's right elbow and knee.
And he saw tiny red marks on her forehead and around her eyes.
These petechial hemorrhages form when tiny blood vessels burst because the blood flow is constricted.
Dr. Hood then examined and dissected the neck muscles.
She had some more subtle bruises and abrasions, very hard to see, on her neck, where there'd been clearly as I found out from looking at beneath the skin, hard gripping of the upper neck.
Toxicology tests showed Stephanie had taken a higher than normal dose of a prescription sleep medication.
A check of local pharmacies revealed the drug had been prescribed for Craig, not Stephanie.
Dr. Hood concluded that Stephanie had been drugged, and then strangled to death.
Stephanie was finally laid to rest in her family plot.
Immediately after the burial, police brought Craig Rabinowitz in for questioning.
During the interview, Craig told the same story as he did on the night of Stephanie's death-- that he had been watching a hockey game on TV when Stephanie went in to take a bath, and no one else had been in the house.
That's when police revealed the evidence that proved Stephanie was dead for two hours before he called 911, and that the autopsy proved she had been strangled.
Prosecutors concluded that the motive was money.
He had dug himself into this deep hole financially.
Now part of it is lavishing money on the stripper.
But that he needed to have that cash so that he could get out of debt, because clearly he could have divorced his wife, and run off with the stripper if she would have had him.
But I don't think she'd have him if she found out that he was broke.
Craig had stretched his business scam as far as it could go.
His investors wanted their money back, and were putting pressure on him.
We had evidence in the case that indicated the they were expecting to get their money at the end of April.
Well the murder was in the last week in April.
And despite Craig's denials, his credit card receipts told investigators that he was visiting local hotels, possibly with Summer.
On some of those receipts, there was room service for two people.
So we assumed that he was going there with her.
Prosecutors believe Craig set his plan in motion after they returned home from dinner in the Thai restaurant.
Before going to bed, Craig spiked Stephanie's drink with his prescription sleep medication, more than enough to knock her out.
He carried Stephanie upstairs, removed her clothes, and placed her in the bathtub to drown her.
But the bath water revived her.
Her bruised elbows and knees showed Stephanie struggled, but she had no chance.
The forensic evidence shows he gripped her around the neck, and held her under water.
Frightened by what he had done, Craig waited two hours to call 911.
The gamble that Craig Rabinowitz engaged in was that we would not conduct an autopsy.
I think the autopsy decision was a very critical decision.
I think because when it first came across, the outward appearances of it was that a horrible accident had taken place.
There were sensitivities, I think, in trying to be sensitive to the family's wishes to bury Stephanie under Jewish custom, and to bury her within a day of her death.
But the autopsy found the petechial hemorrhages, the neck bruising, and the two hour delay between her death and the 911 call.
The forensic accounting uncovered the motive.
When he was charged with first degree murder, Craig Rabinowitz pleaded not guilty.
Craig Rabinowitz pleaded not guilty.
But on his first day in court, he had a change of heart.
He said his wife appeared to him in a dream and convinced him to end the trial and confess to what he had done.
I think that's complete nonsense.
I think he plead guilty for selfish reasons.
He knew that we would spend several weeks just completely annihilating his character in front of the whole world, including his mother and friends and whatnot.
Craig Rabinowitz, if this proved anything, was a selfish, self-absorbed, weak person.
And I think the prosecutor saw his plea not just as a heartfelt act of contrition to help the families, but as a self-serving, cowardly act, that allowed him to avoid truly confronting and articulating in public the detail and the exact nature of he had done.
Craig Rabinowitz was sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole.
I had no doubt that this would work out, and Craig would be convicted.
What this was doing to Stephanie's family had a much more immediate impact on me.
And I think they really needed closure.
They needed a full understanding of what had occurred.
And to me, that's what the forensic evidence did.
Are blades of grass like a fingerprint or a snowflake, each one different in some way?
Police in the Bahamas thought all grass was pretty much the same, until a forensic botanist showed them that some grass is better than others.
Just 120 miles off the coast of Florida are the Bahamas, a group of islands that are one of the world's premier tourist destinations.
It's particularly popular with golfers, since the tropical climate means they can play year-round.
But in the fall of 1999, the weather turned deadly.
The islands were battered by a tropical storm.
The next morning, the groundskeeper of the Emerald Golf Course found more than downed trees and water damage.
Golf Course found more than downed trees and water damage.
We found out that there was a female body on the golf course.
She appeared to have been there overnight.
And it had been raining for some time.
The victim's throat had been slit, and a $1 bill had been carefully placed on her body.
To me, that sent a very profound message.
Because she was laying out there naked.
Her throat was slashed-- that's very graphic.
And the only thing that was sort of sitting there speaking to us was a $1 bill.
A few yards away, investigators found the victim's clothing, a woman's ring, and a used a condom.
There was the indication that there was an attempt, at least an attempt, for the most part, of a sexual assault.
Police couldn't find the murder weapon, even though they searched the entire golf course with a metal detector.
The victim was identified as 19-year-old Samantha Forbes.
A recent high school graduate, who lived with her family just six miles away from the golf course.
She was loving, kind.
She never give me one hard word one day yet.
She was a beautiful person.
Not a day goes by that I don't miss her.
Samantha's mother told investigators that Samantha left home the night before with her friend, Marjorie Saunders.
The two went to a local nightclub.
I took her up there where I work.
She reached there-- the minute she reached there, a gentleman was there saying, Samantha, how you doing?
Would you like to have a drink?
And she say, oh, yes, you know.
And they sit down and they talk.
Marjorie and Samantha met two men that night.
Around midnight, Samantha said she was leaving with them to go to another bar.
She likes to party.
Samantha likes to party.
And she think it was a little too early to go home.
She wanted to go Freeport, or different discos and finish enjoying her night.
Marjorie said she tried to stop her.
So I said, Samantha, come. Let me take you back home.
She said, I'm going.
So two guys, they left, one holding each hand, and took her away.
Marjorie told police she thought the two men were sailors.
If true, this was potentially bad news for investigators.
Ships come and go from the island port quickly, and the sailors could be long gone by now.
And on an island where tourism is the main source of revenue, the pressure to solve the murder was enormous.
A young, attractive, Bohemian lady laying on a golf course with her throat slashed.
Something is definitely wrong about that.
The brutal murder of Samantha Forbes shocked residents in the resort town of Freeport in the Bahamas.
Marjorie Saunders was with Samantha on the night she was killed, and blames herself for not doing more to prevent it.
She caught a ride with two total strangers that I even didn't know.
I feel like the whole world came crashing down on me.
And from Samantha's death, upwards to this day, my life hasn't been the same.
The storm that hit the Bahamas on the night of Samantha's murder complicated the investigation.
We had a watery environment, because it rained.
So certainly, evidence would be lost or destroyed just simply by the water.
Potential fingerprints, hair, and clothing fibers, to the extent they existed, were all washed away from Samantha's body in the storm.
And the rains also removed any biological evidence that may have been on the condom found nearby.
When Samantha's murder was reported in the local newspaper, a bartender on the island called with some additional information.
She said, Samantha came into her bar with the two sailors.
And at one point, she got into an argument with one of them.
They exchanged some harsh words, I understand.
The bartender said one of Samantha's friends, Keith Lotmore, stepped in to break it up.
Keith Lotmore, stepped in to break it up.
It appears that Keith Lotmore, because he knew Samantha, tried to calm her down.
And told her not to worry about that man, to leave him alone and not to answer him.
And apparently she stopped arguing with him.
After the sailors left, Lotmore and his friend, Dominique Moss, joined Samantha for a drink.
Lotmore and his friend, Dominique Moss, joined Samantha for a drink.
Mr. Lotmore knew Samantha.
There was conversation that went on and he invited, or she asked for a ride home.
And witnesses saw Samantha leave the bar with both men.
Whenever a victim is seen leaving with anyone and those persons, or that person, is the last person to be seen with the victim, automatically they will be a prime suspect.
Lotmore worked as a barber.
Moss was an electrician.
In separate interrogations, they both told the same story.
They said they had given Samantha a ride home.
And after dropping her off, returned to the bar to pick up some food.
The restaurant employees confirmed that they did, in fact, return afterwards.
He went into the restaurant barefoot, I guess looking for the food that he had ordered earlier for himself and had forgotten to take it away when he left.
I guess looking for the food that he had ordered earlier for himself and had forgotten to take it away when he left.
Police inspected Lotmore's car and found no blood or any other evidence of violence.
And they also examined the clothing Lotmore was wearing on the night Samantha was killed.
Investigators found no blood or any signs of a struggle.
Police then asked Dominique Moss for his clothes.
When the police went to retrieve the clothing that he was wearing on that particular morning, he told the police that he did not know-- he didn't even remember what he was wearing.
So the clothing appeared to be another dead end.
With the help of Samantha's friend, Marjorie, police tracked down the two sailors who were with Samantha earlier on the night she was killed.
They admitted they had argued with Samantha at the second bar they went to, but said they left immediately afterwards and went back to their ship.
Their alibi checked out.
For now, the mystery surrounding the two sailors had been solved.
But there were still more questions to answer.
Solving the murder of Samantha Forbes had turned out to be far more difficult than investigators ever imagined.
The rains had washed away potential forensic evidence.
And her body was found on an exclusive golf course surrounded by large expensive homes.
It was very shocking to know that something like that had taken place overnight.
And the-- the subdivision is a fairly upscale quiet subdivision.
And to learn that something like that had literally happened in their backyards was really troubling for some residents.
Keith Lotmore said he gave Samantha a ride home that night.
Samantha a ride home that night.
But Samantha's family said she never came home.
Police found no forensic evidence or anything suspicious in Lotmore's car or on his clothing.
And then, investigators remembered something.
During Samantha's autopsy, the medical examiner noticed some botanical evidence on her body, most likely from the golf course where her body was found.
We had minute, tiny particles of fragments of grass.
And these I would describe in terms of size as less than a millimeter.
And investigators found the same particles on Lotmore's shoes and socks.
On those two items we discovered, lo and behold, grass particles.
Investigators needed to know whether there was any way to tell if the grass came from the same location.
Under a high-powered microscope, Ferguson analyzed the grass from Lotmore's shoes and from Samantha's body.
He soon realized this wasn't typical grass.
It was unusually thin, and had other unique characteristics.
So when you look at them under the stereoscope, they have a defined venation, striations on the surface that were parallel.
And seeing those on the various items of evidence, certainly pricked our curiosity.
I felt that this was my only physical evidence, so I needed to have the grass botanically classified and identified.
To do that, Ferguson asked Dr. Jane Bock, one of the world's most respected forensic botanists, to conduct an analysis.
She had a difficult task.
Worldwide, there are almost 9,000 different species of grass.
In the Bahamas alone, there are dozens.
Under a microscope, Dr. Bock compared grass samples from the crime scene and from Lotmore's shoes.
One of the finest grasses I've ever seen.
It doesn't even approach a millimeter in diameter.
It's tiny, fine, fine grass.
I've never seen grass that fine here in Colorado, where I spend a lot of time.
Or in Arizona, where I also spend a lot of time.
Eventually, Dr. Bock was able to identify the grass as a type of Bermuda grass.
But it wasn't the usual type of Bermuda grass.
If you look under the microscope and you have three or four kinds of grass, even different strains of Bermuda grass, this one is outstanding.
It was a variety known as Almond Bermuda, an unusually thin grass that thrives in subtropical climates.
Almond Bermuda grass is outstanding because it's so fine.
And it responds well to rain, and it turns green upon being wet.
And it turns brown in a hurry if there's a drought.
Investigators thought this was interesting, but not enough to make their entire case.
But then, they learned something surprising.
Almond Bermuda grass is primarily used on golf courses.
And of the three golf courses on the Grand Island of the Bahamas, only one, the Emerald Golf Course where Samantha Forbes' body had been found, used Almond Bermuda grass.
The groundsman, the information he give us was that this particular strain of grass was unique to his tees and fairways, and this was his baby, so to speak.
It was unique to him.
And no other golf course would-- would have had that particular strain.
The groundskeeper planted Almond Bermuda grass, even though he knew it wasn't durable and didn't do well on resort courses with lots of play.
He chose it because it tends to do well on courses that get a lot of rain.
When analyzed, the grass samples from the Emerald Golf Course, Samantha's body, and Keith Lotmore's shoes were identical.
Samantha's body, and Keith Lotmore's shoes were identical.
I think the chance that Keith Lotmore could have gotten that grass from somewhere else is slim to none.
It wasn't that there was a single blade and I said, aha!
I had dozens and dozens of specimens.
And I had, of course, collected stuff from where Samantha's body was found and it was a tight fit.
When confronted with the botanical evidence, Keith Lotmore admitted he was on the golf course that night with Samantha Forbes, but insisted that Dominique Moss was the one who had raped and killed her.
Keith Lotmore admitted he was on the golf course that night with Samantha Forbes, but insisted that Dominique Moss was the one who had raped and killed her.
Moss was the one who had raped and killed her.
Not surprisingly, Moss denied it and pointed the finger at Lotmore.
So police arrested both men and charged them with murder.
But they still weren't sure which man was telling the truth.
Grass clippings found on Keith Lotmore's shoes and socks placed him at the very location where Samantha's body was discovered.
Samantha's body was discovered.
When confronted with this evidence, Lotmore admitted there was more to what happened that night than he had told them earlier.
Lotmore admitted there was more to what happened that night than he had told them earlier.
Lotmore said, he helped Samantha end her argument with the two sailors in the bar.
Afterwards, he and his friend, Dominique Moss, joined Samantha for a drink.
Lotmore said, Samantha later accepted a ride home.
Along the way, Dominique Moss, who was sitting beside Samantha, had been making unwanted advances towards her.
Moss suggested they stop the car along the golf course so he and Samantha could go for a walk on the course alone.
An idea that Samantha wanted no part of.
As soon as the car stopped, Samantha got out and made a run for it.
She ran across the golf course with Moss in pursuit.
Lotmore said he ran down the fairway to try to stop Moss, which is how he got the grass clippings on his shoes and socks.
But Moss had a knife and he threatened to kill Lotmore if he intervened.
So Lotmore said he backed off.
Moss sexually assaulted Samantha.
Then killed her with his knife.
Afterwards, he left the $1 bill on her body.
Dominique Moss is the coldest son-of-a-bitch I ever met in my life.
I ever met in my life.
The grass that was found on Keith Lotmore's tennis shoes and socks substantiated Keith Lotmore's story that, yes, I was there.
Yes, I went behind Dominique Moss to try to stop him from hurting Samantha.
But I was not successful in doing so.
Forensic scientists analyzed Lotmore's clothing more carefully and confirmed there was no blood spatter, grass, or grass stains on his pants or shirt.
This confirmed his story that he wasn't near Samantha during the assault or the murder.
I found the grass on Keith's shoes and on his socks.
But not on his shorts and not on his shirt, which indicated to the prosecution, and to the defense both, that, in fact, he had not raped her.
And he had probably not been on the ground and slit her throat, either.
Lotmore was standing.
He was never kneeling down.
Not surprisingly, Dominique Moss denied he was the killer and blamed Lotmore.
Nevertheless, both men went on trial for Samantha's murder.
And it was Moss' girlfriend who delivered the most damaging testimony.
She said she washed Moss' clothes on the night of the murder.
And did so for a reason.
Dominique's girlfriend was very powerful.
Her evidence was very powerful against-- against Dominique.
She talked about him coming home drunk.
She talked about blood being on his warm-up suit.
She talked about him saying that someone got killed.
She was able to tell us Dominique Moss was acting strangely when he came home.
She was able to tell us that, in her estimation, he was intoxicated.
She was able also to tell us that he said to her, the girl is dead.
Dominique Moss was convicted of the rape and murder of Samantha Forbes and sentenced to 25 years in prison.
Based on the forensic evidence, the jury concluded Keith Lotmore was not an active participant in the rape and murder, although he was present.
So the jury convicted him only of manslaughter.
And he was sentenced to three years in prison.
Samantha's family has tried to move on.
They say they're grateful for the seemingly insignificant clue, the tiny grass shavings which brought her killer to justice.
Though he killed my baby, but I don't got no hard feelings against him, because the law-- I believe, the prosecutor did what she's supposed to do.
The strain of grass that was used on that particular golf course was extremely rare.
Extremely rare.
It is not something that you see every day.
I believe that forensic evidence was very important in this case, in the sense of linking victim and-- victim and suspect together, and at a specific geographic location.
Fortunately, they were in an environment where trace evidence became available through those minute particles of grass.
That's what stands out in my mind.
Grass. The grass was greener.
The murder of a well known radio personality left police wondering who wanted her dead.
A tiny piece of plastic, a sniffer dog, and a sponge were all investigators needed to find the answer.
Radio personalities have many fans, but aren't usually the target of stalkers since there's a certain anonymity that comes with the medium.
But 31-year-old Debbie Dicus was different.
Her late night radio show on an FM station in Virginia captured listeners' attention with the unique blend of intimate conversation, self-disclosure, and a little music thrown in too.
Why don't you and I make sure Maryland and lots of kids like her are not disappointed again this year?
She would tell the audience, I'm kind of feeling this way today, be it happy or sad or upset or maybe she was elated that, you know, something good had happened in her life.
So she'd say, you know, why don't you call in and tell me what's going on with your life, or how do you feel about this or whatever.
She sounded like the girl next door.
I think that was one of the things that made her so popular was that she seemed to be very accessible.
But the story of Debbie Dicus took a tragic turn when police received this telephone call from a hunter.
I found a dead body.
You know where that city field is that they have for a garden?
Was it male or female?
It was a female.
Black or white?
She was white.
When police arrived they found Debbie's body in a ditch near the community garden where she grew vegetables.
My initial viewing of the body seemed to indicate to me a possible sexually motivated crime.
Her clothing was in disarray and the position of her body just seemed to lend itself to that possible motive.
Robbery didn't appear to be the motive since her purse was in her car about 30 feet away.
Clearly there was an attack at the back of the car.
Her hair barrettes had fallen out, her cigarettes had fallen out on the ground.
There was obviously signs of a struggle.
There was blood on the car.
Near Debbie's car police found their first piece of evidence.
We noticed a very black piece of plastic.
At the time, we wasn't sure what it was sitting on top the track, which meant it had to be there after the car drove in.
As police investigated the scene, Debbie's live in boyfriend Bill Campbell showed up before police even called him.
Debbie's live in boyfriend Bill Campbell showed up before police even called him.
As I pulled in, the police officer sitting in his car immediately got out to stop me.
And he says, you can't go back there.
I said, my girlfriend's got a city garden plot back there.
She's gardening.
He goes, yeah, but you can't go back there, there's been a crime.
Of course, then I knew something was wrong.
Campbell was a disc jockey at the same radio station.
He said he was worried when Debbie didn't arrive home at her usual time.
At some point, he told me that she was dead and didn't give me any other further details.
One of Debbie's co-workers thought professional jealousy might have been a motive.
I will admit I did have the list of usual suspects, you know, of people that used to work at the station and no longer worked there that, you know, maybe didn't get along with her, because they thought she was too mild, and they didn't like or style of broadcasting.
Apparently, Debbie told friends that she feared this exact scenario, that someone, possibly a member of her radio audience, might get too close.
Debbie had a paralyzing fear that she actually sat down and discussed with me that someone was going to break into the studio attack her, rape her, and kill her.
Maybe she had a premonition that something like this would happen, or maybe she was just overly cautious.
Because she was a celebrity could it be somebody who followed her there and waited a fan, a deranged fan, a Play Misty for Me kind of situation?
Misty for Me kind of situation?
This meant a huge pool of potential suspects in the Norfolk, Williamsburg, and Virginia Beach communities.
Police knew it would be a difficult investigation.
The community just was very afraid and it was palpable.
It was all people were talking about.
You'd go to the grocery store, you'd go to get gas, you'd go to the dry cleaners and that's what people were talking about.
Debbie Dicus a popular late night radio personality, was found murdered in a public park where she had planted a vegetable garden.
Here's a woman who's doing her gardening in the afternoon, where there are people in and out of all the time, and she's found brutally murdered.
So it's not the middle of the night in a place where she perhaps shouldn't have been.
At Debbie's autopsy, the medical examiner found multiple lacerations on the front and back of her head.
And there was an unusual patterned bruise on her back.
Her body temperature and rigor mortis indicated she had been dead for only a short time before police arrived.
And the police told us that she had been dead no less than two hours.
The cause of death was asphyxiation.
She had been strangled and then drowned in a small puddle of water.
The medical examiner found no signs of sexual assault.
Evidence shows there was a struggle.
I just wish she'd had kicked his ass.
At the crime scene, police continued to search for possible clues.
They interviewed everyone who had visited the vegetable garden bad day.
They mentioned a young blond haired boy who was often seen walking around in the area.
They couldn't recall when they last saw him, but it hadn't been long before the offense date.
So we set about to try to locate him.
The boy spent a lot of time in the cemetery adjacent to the garden, and police were able to locate him.
This young man was identified as a Michael LaPrade.
He was an area resident, lived further up on Armistead, about two miles from the scene.
But LaPrade was not in the city on the day of the murder and was ruled out.
Debbie's boyfriend was eliminated as a suspect.
He was at home on the afternoon of the murder.
Next, police checked phone logs at the radio station to see how many people called Debbie's radio show multiple times.
I'm sure over the years that we spent together and being in radio that long, you know, I'm sure we'd get the occasional wacky caller, but none sticks in my mind that she felt threatened by or anything like that.
Investigators got their first real break in the area surrounding the vegetable garden.
Just a few yards from Debbie's body they found what appeared to be the wooden shaft of a garden It had been broken in half.
It had been broken in half.
It was obvious that the hoe was used to hit her in the head on several occasions.
It was long cuts in the top of her head, her scalp was wide open.
It was consistent with hard blows of the hoe.
A police dog came in to track the killer's scent.
Glennell Fullman advised the officers not to touch the hoe until the dog could get a sniff.
I didn't want anybody else to touch the hoe.
So I had them bring the hoe out of the water with using a stick, just the handle, the rest of the hoe stayed in the water.
I didn't want to disturb it anymore than I had to.
The dog picked up the scent.
Some believe it's the adrenaline they detect.
Dogs do smell fear.
Yes, they do.
When a person is getting ready to commit a crime, they know it's wrong, their adrenalin goes crazy, the fear factor comes out.
They don't want to be caught.
And that puts out more scent from the body which makes a better tracking.
As the dog sniffed around, a small crowd of bystanders had gathered nearby.
Strangely, the dog headed straight towards them.
He went past her car and then headed for the crowd.
I advised the crowd to stand perfectly still, that he would not bite anybody.
Just don't move.
He went up to a gentleman's back legs, sniffed up and down his legs, stopped right there, and turned and looked at me.
Why had the dog identified a man standing in the crowd?
Investigators would soon learn why.
When I think about her it's always in a good way, a positive way.
I don't, I don't dwell on how she left us, but what she was before.
When radio personality Debbie Dicus was found murdered in a field, analysts searched for evidence on the broken hoe found near her body.
Hairs were recovered from the blade end that was caked in mud.
Those hairs were consistent with the victim.
A police dog tracked the scent on the hoe to a man standing in the parking lot watching police process the scene.
His name was Ronald Blanchard, the same man who found Debbie's body and called police.
While there could be an innocent explanation for that, but that was certainly one thing that we were all very interested in.
21-year-old Ronald Blanchard was a newlywed who worked on a fishing boat.
He had no apparent motive and claimed he didn't know the victim was a radio personality until someone in the crowd told him.
I did a background investigation.
I went to the trailer court where he used to live and found out that he had a record.
He was a high school drop out.
I found that he, you know, a very, very unstable human being.
When questioned, Blanchard denied he had touched the hoe when he found Debbie's body.
He said all he did was check Debbie's pulse.
On Blanchard's shirt, analysts found blood spatter.
When tested, the blood was clearly not his.
The proteins and enzymes that were identified was consistent with the victim, which means those genetic material that was detected could originate from her but did not originate from the suspect.
Blanchard's claim that Debbie's blood got on to his shirt when he leaned over her body was substantiated to some extent by the evidence.
A contact transfer would be where some bloody object such as a bloody hand makes contact with a surface that is clean, and the blood is transferred from one surface to the other.
But other blood stains could not be so easily explained.
I recognized at least two areas of stain, one on the shirt, one on the pants, that would fall into the category of impact spatter.
Then police remembered Blanchard said he was hunting when he discovered Debbie's body.
So police asked for the rifle he was using.
Not only that it had a lot of mud on it, but the barrel of the gun had been bent and the bolt action had been disabled.
In other words, it had been crushed and broken off, a piece had been missing from it.
This was indicative of swinging the rifle like a bat.
Interestingly, the plastic fragment found near Debbie's car was the missing piece from Blanchard's rifle.
He was asked specifically if he had been near the victim's vehicle, and he indicated no he had not.
The stock of his rifle was the same shape and left the same pattern as the injury on Debbie's back.
And investigators found even more.
We noticed that there were hairs up at that bolt area which was damaged.
And two hairs were recovered from that bolt area.
And they were microscopically examined and saw that they were forcibly removed.
Hairs from Blanchard's rifle were compared to head hairs taken from Debbie Dicus during her autopsy.
Under high magnification, scientists discovered they were microscopically similar.
Coincidentally, before her death Debbie told her boyfriend that she had gotten into an argument with a man who had been hunting close to the community vegetable garden.
Well, she did mention that she'd seen a guy with a BB gun.
And she didn't describe him or she didn't necessarily get a bad vibe from him.
She was just a little angry that a guy would be out there, you know, shooting birds.
And there was another question that haunted police.
Why would Blanchard report the crime if he was the killer?
Ronald Blanchard claimed he found Debbie Dicus' body in the ravine while he was walking to his car after an afternoon of hunting.
He insisted that the blood on his shirt and pants was the result of trying to help Debbie Dicus not hurt her.
To find out, forensic analyst Norm Tiller put on white coveralls and conducted an experiment.
He used a sponge soaked in blood and placed it on a motorcycle helmet.
Then used a hoe like the one found at the crime scene.
I delivered some pretty substantial blows with that hoe and immediately we began to produce the same types of stains that were on the suspect's t-shirt.
And the harder he hits it the further it goes and the tinier So it's, sort of, something that people, I think, inherently will understand the physics of, but you haven't ever really thought about it in that context before.
So it's, sort of, something that people, I think, inherently will understand the physics of, but you haven't ever really thought about it in that context before.
Experts say the only way Blanchard would have this kind of blood spatter on his shirt was if he was present during her attack.
They were on the upper portion of the shirt, across the chest, on both sleeves, and actually some stains were actually on the back of the shirt on the upper portion of the back of the shirt.
The blood on the back of someone's shirt means the person was swinging an object covered in blood.
There's no other way to explain this.
He can talk about transfer all day long.
He can talk about trying to feel her pulse and falling down into the ditch.
But that will never explain how the spatter got onto his clothes.
There's no way he could have gotten blood on his shirt in that way.
And they, to me as an observer, they proved it beyond a shadow of a doubt to me.
The evidence on Blanchard's jeans was also consistent with a struggle.
The knee areas of the jeans had grassy stains like somebody would have knelt down into an area with their knees and had grass stains on those as well.
Ronald Blanchard was arrested and charged with attempted rape, abduction, and murder.
Prosecutors believed Blanchard saw Debbie at the community garden, they may have spoken or met before.
The evidence shows that Blanchard hit Debbie with the butt of his rifle.
When she tried to get away, he hit her again breaking a piece of the plastic on the rifle, which was found near her car.
The motive may have been sexual assault, and the evidence shows she fought back aggressively.
So Blanchard struck her repeatedly with the garden hoe, which created the fine mist of blood splatter on his clothing.
He then strangled her to death.
When he got home, his wife probably saw the blood on his hands.
This forced him to create the cover story that he found a dead body in the field.
This, in turn, required him to call police.
I've found a dead body.
Once he made that call, he had to continue the charade and go along with his story through the end.
He went back to the scene to speak with police, and the dog made the identification.
This was the first case that I had a really used a dog track to come up with a critical incriminating piece of evidence.
So learning about the science of dog handling and tracking was really fascinating.
Police say their sniffer dog Roadie was used in hundreds of other cases and had an incredible record of success.
And I figured it up.
It was over 700 cases.
And of those over 700 cases, he was 99% accurate.
He found what he was looking for, whatever I scented him on the track trail, he finished the track and found an object, a person, a car, whatever was at the other end, he found it.
At his trial, Ronald Blanchard maintained his innocence and even testified in his own defense.
But the evidence was too great.
Blanchard was convicted of Debbie Dicus' murder and sentenced to two consecutive life terms.
He showed no remorse at all.
And he insisted that he was not guilty that they had, that the police had the wrong, the wrong person.
Well, he never could or never would acknowledge his true involvement in this crime.
Only now years after the crime in a letter to the producers of this program has Blanchard finally admitted his guilt.
Blanchard finally admitted his guilt.
ROBERT BLANCHARD (VOICEOVER) I deeply regret the pain and suffering that I've caused so many people.
Never doubt that I don't realize what I have done and accept the consequences of my actions.
I'm sorry It took so long for him to do that, but I guess that's a step in the right direction for him to continue living with what happened.
Debbie's friends and family didn't need Blanchard's confession to know the truth.
The truth, they say, was clearly evident from the forensics.
You go, what went through this guy's head?
I didn't feel hatred toward him.
I felt no empathy toward him.
He's just a stupid, mean guy apparently.
I appreciate what science has been able to do, because if they weren't able to track down Blanchard I have to wonder where it would have stopped.
I have to wonder where it would have stopped.
Without the forensics, I don't think it could have all come together in the way it did.
There would've been a lot of pieces pointing toward him, but I think there would have been a lot of holes in the jigsaw puzzle without the forensics.
A man sleeping in his bed was brutally murdered by an intruder.
The victim lived alone, but with three ex-wives, there was no shortage of suspects.
A muddy footprint, an electrically charged blood sample, and a blood spatter recreation were all that was needed to solve the case.
47-year-old Bill Lowes rarely missed work.
His employer considered Bill to be one of their most reliable and conscientious truck drivers.
So when Bill didn't show up for work for two straight days, the supervisor called his family to find out why.
I told my wife that, well, I'll run by where he lived because my place of employment is just down the street from where Bill-- Bill lives.
So I went to-- to his house.
Bill's car was outside and his front door was open.
Inside, Joe found his brother.
He said he'd never seen anything like it.
In there where he was laying in bed, and blood all over the floor, blood all over the walls.
It was just like I went through hell.
The officers told me they had never seen quite so much blood on a ceiling before.
Bill's body was under the bed sheets.
His body was cold, indicating he'd been dead for some time.
You wouldn't think it would happen to you, or to your family.
In a small town like Cape Girardeau, Missouri, police and sheriff officers all knew Bill Lowes.
They said he was an easygoing man who never finished high school, but was a hard worker.
He spent his free time playing pool at a local bar.
He had a history of some drinking, but that was it.
There was no indication that William Lowes was involved in any kind of drugs or gangs or any kind of activity or illegal activity like that.
Police found no signs of forced entry, but Lowes had a habit of leaving his doors unlocked.
A habit his friends and family would have known.
Whoever committed this crime either knew that there was a certain door would be left unlocked, or they had a set of keys.
So it was someone close to him. LT.
The fact that we found his wallet in his pants pocket undisturbed indicates to me that robbery was not a motive in this case.
It has long been a rule of thumb in homicide investigations that 75% of the time, the victim knew his killer or was related to his killer.
That it's either a friend or a family member.
Forensic pathologist Dr. Mary Case performed the autopsy and quickly concluded this was a homicide.
He had four very large wounds above and slightly behind the ear, then going towards the back of the head.
And Dr. Case found proof that Bill Lowes was asleep when he was attacked and never heard the killer.
There were no defensive wounds, which are wounds that we sometimes see when people are trying to ward off an injury, hold up their hand, hold up their arm.
And then you would see injuries to those surfaces.
There were no other wounds to his body.
Bill Lowes was virtually totally deaf in one ear, and partially deaf in another, which also explained why he could be sleeping in bed and not hear the killer come into the house.
It was a very vicious attack.
You have a man who is asleep in bed, and from the blood spatter evidence, you cant tell that he never moved at all.
Police didn't find the murder weapon at the crime scene, but Dr. Case suspected it was a long linear object.
You could think of things like crowbars, or a baseball bat.
Investigators found no foreign fingerprints inside Bill's home.
Outside, however, they found their first piece of forensic evidence.
A shoe impression in the mud.
It had rained in Cape Girardeau, and so if that shoe print had been left over from days or weeks before, it would've-- it would've not still been there from the weather.
Crime technicians poured plaster into the shoe impression, a forensic technique that's been done the same way for more than 200 years.
When the plaster hardened, investigators had a clear shoe impression.
And if we could find the person that was wearing that tennis shoes, we could at least put them at the crime scene within the period of time that we felt that the murder had occurred.
And to find a suspect, investigators had to figure out who wanted Bill Lowes dead.
After the I don't know how many different people came to me and said that Bill had helped him out or gave me a room to stay, or gave me food, I didn't have anything.
I don't know how many different people came to me and said that Bill had helped him out or gave me a room to stay, or gave me food, I didn't have anything.
I didn't have anything.
Bill was that-- Bill was that way.
I mean, that-- that was Bill.
For him to die like this, you know, it's just not right.
In the search for Bill Lowes' killer, investigators began by looking at the usual suspects.
You look at his coworkers and see is there a coworker that might be mad at him.
Was he having an affair with another female coworker that-- that might have triggered animosity from a spouse.
Although Bill Lowes wasn't married at the time of his murder, he had three ex-wives.
80% percent of homicides that occur are considered love-hate killings.
You had to love the person enough to kill them, or hate him enough to kill him.
And to do that, you have to be close to that person.
Him and his first wife were still on good speaking terms because they had a child together.
His second marriage, I think they were still on good terms, but it just didn't work out.
Ex-wife number one and ex-wife number two both had alibis for the night of the murder.
And then, of course, the third marriage, that's a different story.
39-year-old Wanda Kay Knupp was married to Bill Lowes for about two years.
I thought Bill when I first met him was a gentle kind person.
Bill's family wouldn't accept me because there's an old saying in southern Illinois, you don't come from the right side of the railroad tracks, you're the wrong type.
And I came from the poor side.
Bill was Wanda's sixth husband, and she was convinced he would be a wonderful stepfather to her 17-year-old son, Bryan.
He was a great man, you know.
I enjoyed going out and doing things with him.
The job he had, I used to go with him all the way to St.
Louis and back helping him and stuff.
Wanda and Bill both drank heavily, ran up debts, and their fights were occasionally physical.
When he started drinking, it went to [beep].
I loved him at one time, he was a great stepfather.
But when he was drinking, he was a piece of [beep].
What caused us to decide to separate is when I took one severe beating from him.
Bill was not an abusive individual as certain people try to portray him as.
No, he was not.
Wanda and Bill divorced a year before he was killed.
But investigators were surprised to learn that Wanda was still the beneficiary of Bill's $20,000 life insurance policy.
Here she has 20,000 motives to have him killed when she's no longer married to him and she's having financial trouble.
So it was a red flag that the officers felt like they definitely needed to look into.
Wanda vehemently denied any involvement in Bill's murder.
The police asked me about the life insurance, and I told the police I didn't know nothing about it.
And Wanda had an alibi.
On the night of the murder, she was in a bar with her new boyfriend, and there were plenty of witnesses.
And so they were able to rule out that the fact that she had had anything to do with it.
Her son, Bryan, also had a solid alibi.
He was camping with his friend Mike Hale.
I got the receipts.
Michael Hale backed up the alibi.
They went fishing.
He could produce receipts of where they went and bought the camping supplies and the food for the camping outing.
No one seemed to have a motive, and the investigation quickly turned cold.
Bryan Crews had an alibi for the night of his stepfather's murder.
He said he was camping with his best friend, Mike Hale, and Hale corroborated his story.
The police interview with Bryan Crews was routine.
Crews had no financial motive in the murder and claimed his relationship with Bill Lowes was a good one.
He was the dad I always wanted and never had.
We had great times as a family, something that I'd never had for real as-- all through my childhood.
While they were talking, the sheriff noticed Crews was wearing athletic shoes that looked similar to the shoe impression found at the crime scene.
Could I see the bottom of your sneakers?
I asked to see the soles of his shoes.
And when he showed me, from just seeing the shoe prints at the scene, I knew the shoe was very close to what they had found.
Investigators sent Bryan's shoes to analyst Dave Warren.
When we get the shoe out, we compare it directly with the plaster cast because the plaster cast is a positive impression of the outsole.
So we're able to compare those with each other.
The shoe impression was not the best in terms of quality.
Occasionally, a shoe slips when someone walks through mud.
The plaster cast showed the size, make, and model of the shoe.
And just enough of the tread pattern to permit a comparison.
The wear patterns that were present in the 3-dimensional plaster casts were consistent with the wear patterns that were on the suspect's shoes.
It was a got you type piece of information, like, you know, we found these shoe prints and they-- they look like they match your shoes.
And so, you know, a part of you is sitting there thinking, kind of like a chess game, what's his next move?
And you know he's sitting across the table and he's sitting there thinking, oh my gosh, you know, they've got my shoe prints at the scene now.
Oh crap, you know, what am I going to say next?
But Bryan Crews had a simple explanation.
He said he went to Bill's home a few days before the murder to get some of his mother's personal belongings.
He said he left the shoe impression at that time.
So police needed to make sure Bryan's alibi for the night of the murder was air-tight.
And the alibi started to crumble when police discovered that Bryan's friend, 31-year-old Mike Hale had a prior conviction for robbery.
Michael Hale had been to prison already, so he knew that the stakes were high.
Initially, Mike Hale corroborated Bryan's alibi.
But under pressure, Hale started to change his story.
When it got to a certain point, it was just like, I'm going to tell you what I know.
And so then, Bryan Crews' alibi then began to be torn down.
Mike Hale admitted he was with Bryan Crews on the night of the murder and said they stopped by Bill Lowes' home.
Hale said he waited outside while Bryan went in to speak with his stepfather.
He said Bryan came out a few minutes later, covered in blood and carrying an axe handle.
And, of course, at that time, Hale was like, whoa, you know, what happened?
Hale was like, whoa, you know, what happened?
And Crews then told him, he said, well, Bill Lowes will never bother my mother again.
Bill Lowes will never bother my mother again.
Hale said they walked to a nearby office park where Bryan threw the axe handle onto the roof of a vacant office building.
Police found a wooden axe handle just where Mike said it would be.
Investigators found no fingerprints, but there were several human hairs and some dried blood.
The hair was microscopically similar to that of Bill Lowes.
The expert was able to say that the hair that he found, only about 1 in 4,500 people would be expected to have those same characteristics.
The blood on the handle was type A, consistent with Bill Lowes' blood type.
Since this was before DNA testing, investigators used a process called electrophoresis to analyze the blood.
They exposed a sample to electricity, which enabled them to separate then chart the enzymes.
The results were clear.
This was the victim's blood.
Only 3 in 100 people would have this same combination of enzymes.
And-- and Bill Lowes was one of them.
So we had a murder weapon that we could relate positively back to William Lowes as it being the murder weapon.
But investigators still needed proof that Bryan Crews was the killer.
Or was the real killer Mike Hale?
Forensic testing proved that Bill Lowes was beaten to death with the wooden axe handle found several blocks from the crime scene.
But there were no fingerprints found on the handle, so investigators weren't sure who had used the weapon.
Mike Hale said Bryan Crews was the killer.
But when told of Hale's statement, Crews denied it.
I can look you in the eye, you can hook me up to a lie detector test, and I can tell you point blank, I did not kill Bill Lowes.
I did not kill Bill Lowes.
I did not conspire to kill Bill Lowes and I'll take any test you want.
Crews claimed that his accuser, Mike Hale, was the real killer, so investigators confiscated the clothing each man was wearing on the night of the murder.
After a careful evaluation, investigators found no blood spatter on Mike Hale's clothing.
If Hale had been involved in the murder, he would have had at least some blood on his clothing.
But on Bryan Crews' black sweat shirt and his jeans, investigators found tiny specks of blood spatter, consistent with the type created in a beating.
The blood on the sweatshirt by itself shows that our victim and suspect were at one time together when the victim was bleeding.
That's-- that's pretty powerful stuff.
Crews then admitted he was at Bill's home on the night of the murder, but claimed self-defense.
What happened with me that night?
Basically, there was some of my stuff still in the house and I went over there to get it.
He swung at me with the axe handle and I took it away and hit him in the head with it.
I know I hit him, but I know I didn't kill him.
I know that.
He was breathing when I put him in his bed.
I know he was alive when I left that house.
Crews said that Mike Hale returned to the house later and killed Lowes.
But the forensic evidence contradicted that.
There was no evidence that there was any kind of attack in the kitchen, as Crews claimed.
Had he been struck any of these blows in the kitchen, he would have shed blood.
And there was no blood there.
And there were other discrepancies.
From his voice, I could tell he'd been drinking.
A toxicology test revealed Lowes' blood alcohol level was zero.
Lowes' blood alcohol level was zero.
So those are points of dishonesty there, they're not true.
And when you have somebody that is telling an untrue story, you have to say, why would you tell a story that's not true unless they have something to hide.
And something that is so obviously untrue as he was drunk.
Well, he's obviously not drunk.
Just that one point alone would make you think this person truly has something to hide.
Bryan Crews was arrested and charged with his stepfather's murder.
Prosecutors believe the motive was money, that Bryan Crews wanted to kill his stepfather before he had a chance to remove his mother as beneficiary of his life insurance policy.
According to the forensic evidence, Bryan snuck up to Bill's home and looked into his bedroom window to make sure he was asleep.
Bryan snuck up to Bill's home and looked into his bedroom window to make sure he was asleep.
That's where he left his shoe impression.
Crews then entered Bill's home, picked up the axe handle Bill had put there to defend himself, and beat him to death.
The blood spatter on Bryan's clothes, on the bedroom walls and ceiling, proved he killed Bill Lowes.
And he did it in the bedroom.
He later disposed of the murder weapon by throwing it onto the roof of a vacant building.
But, he did so in front of a witness.
The police made a bargain with Mike Hale.
Mike Hale turned snitch, rat, whatever you want to call it.
The jury deliberated for just one hour before finding Bryan Crews guilty of first degree murder.
He was sentenced to life in prison without parole.
For his part in the crime, Mike Hale was convicted of hindering the prosecution, served one month in jail, and was released.
Prosecutors have no proof that Bryan's mother had anything to do with the crime.
My mom had nothing to do with it.
During our interview, Bryan threatened Mike Hale's life if he ever got out of prison.
If there's justice, Mike Hale will get his.
All I know is one day, I should get out of here one day.
If there's any justice in this world, I'll get out one day.
May come right back to prison, but it would be justified this time.
Prosecutors say it's that kind of thinking that landed Bryan Crews in jail, and they're grateful for the science that put him there.
You started out with a body lying in a bedroom, and it's a complete mystery as to who did it.
And you end up that it was the stepson who had nursed a grudge against this man for some time and now saw dollar signs of a chance to kill him so his mother could get some extra money.
While Bryan's story lied, and we could tell it was lying, the evidence at the crime scene was telling us a different story.
And it doesn't lie.
A restaurant owner was found murdered in his office.
Then his assistant chef committed suicide.
Were these two incidents related?
Scientists had to look deep in the shadows for the answer.
The General Wayne Inn, a Philadelphia landmark.
It was already 70-years-old when George Washington first dined there.
Washington first dined there.
A fascinating old place.
Everybody where the General Wayne Inn is.
You could probably go to the population lower Marion, which is some 60,000, and probably not find anybody that didn't at least know where it was, if not hadn't eaten there at some point.
In 1995, chef Jim Webb and a business partner took over the restaurant with an eye towards restoring it to its former luster.
They were really bringing back a Main Line landmark that had fallen on hard times, in terms of clientele, and was at risk of closing.
The one unusual thing about the place was the rumor that the 300-year-old building was haunted.
I was afraid to be by myself in one area of the restaurant.
I would consider it creepy, um, maybe even somewhat evil.
Two days after Christmas in 1996, employees opened the restaurant to prepare for the day's business.
Upstairs, in the third floor office, they found Jim Webb dead on the floor.
911. What's your emergency?
Paramedics confirmed that Jim had been dead for quite some time, possibly from the night before.
She initially told us, and initially felt that he had hit his head, because he had a knot on his forehead, you know?
Like you had been hit on the head, or you had fallen and struck the edge of a desk.
There was a spent .25 caliber shell casing in the cash tray on Jim's desk.
On closer inspection, investigators discovered he had a gun shot in the back of his head.
That knot on Jim's forehead, in fact, was the projectile having entered the back of his head and failing exit the skin.
Jim Webb was just 31 years old.
He left behind a wife and two very young children.
It was bad. It was bad.
At that point in time, I was pretty much hysterical.
Robbery was pretty quickly dismissed as a motive.
Jim wore a thick gold chain around his neck, and he had several hundred dollars in his wallet in his pocket.
And nothing else was taken or disturbed within the building, that we could see.
Just where Webb's body was located, was in a very remote location.
And that suggested to us that whoever killed Webb was someone familiar with the inn's layout.
Police asked Jim's family if any of his employees wanted him dead.
He was extremely difficult to work with.
Just about everybody that ever worked for him did not like is his management skills or his supervisory skills.
Very hard on employees, and demanded perfection from everybody.
Hoping to trap the killer, police decided not to tell anyone, including Jim's family, about the gunshot wound.
We wanted to know what happened and what-- what went on.
And they wouldn't tell us.
If you keep it to yourself, then I suspect might slip up and indicate that they know of this particular fact, when there's no way they could know unless they were involved with the crime.
In a search for Jim Webb's killer, investigators first looked for clues inside the 300-year-old restaurant.
Webb's body was found in an obscure third floor office.
Among the things in this place were these 300-year-old wooden staircases with planks that would creak and groan and make all these noises.
So there is no way anybody could sneak upstairs and surprise anybody, because you can hear them coming a mile away.
Investigators first questioned Jim's wife, Robin.
She said she was home all night with her two children, and wasn't aware that Jim didn't come home.
And they said, what time did Jim get home last night?
And I said, I don't know.
And they were like, well, what time did he leave this morning?
And I said, I don't know.
And I kind of felt foolish for not knowing.
Jim's business partner, 29-year-old Guy Sileo was also a suspect.
29-year-old Guy Sileo was also a suspect.
They both had $650,000 life insurance policies on each other-- not an uncommon business arrangement, but it sure provided Sileo with a motive.
And Sileo also knew that Jim was unhappy with their partnership.
Jim began to see that he was doing all the work and Sileo was drinking a lot and running around with the waitresses.
And he was, basically, cheating on his wife.
He was drinking on the job.
And drinking, you know, like, hard, heavy stuff, that it was affecting his performance.
Investigators discovered that Sileo bought a Phoenix arms .25 caliber pistol just three weeks before Jim's murder.
Sileo willingly turned it over to police for testing.
The lands and grooves on the test firings, which are marks made on the bullet as it passes through the barrel, were not the same as the fatal bullet.
We had the hopes that, here's a .25 caliber gun.
Maybe this is it.
And if nothing else, we have to rule it out, which is exactly what we did.
It was not the murder weapon.
And Sileo had an alibi.
He said he was with his lover, Felicia Moyse the entire night.
He said they had a drink with Jim Webb after work.
Then they left together to go to a Christmas party, while Jim stayed behind to do some paperwork.
All right. Have a good night.
See you tomorrow.
Felicia was the assistant chef at the restaurant.
And not only confirmed Guy's alibi, she also passed a lie detector test.
So investigators moved on to other possible suspects.
One of the first things that we do in any murder investigation is to, in the business setting, is to check a list of employees for anyone who might have a motive.
Several months earlier, Jim Webb fired a waiter at the restaurant, Ken Norcutt, for using customers credit cards to buy personal items.
Jim Webb fired a waiter at the restaurant, Ken Norcutt, for using customers credit cards to buy personal items.
Ken Norcutt, for using customers credit cards to buy personal items.
One of their waiters had been running credit cards through two times whenever somebody ate there.
And he would pocket the money from one of the transactions.
But Norcutt had an alibi for the night of Jim's murder.
Ironically, he was in police custody on a forgery charge.
Then two months after Jim Webb's murder, there was another tragedy.
Guy Sileo's lover, Felicia Moyse, was found dead in her home of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to her head.
She used her father's service revolver.
She obviously was a key witness.
Now she was dead.
And her death set off all kinds of alarm bells.
She left no note.
So the reason for her suicide remains a mystery.
I like to think of him as a hard worker, a good family man, a good son, very talented, passionate chef.
Jim Webb's funeral service took place six days after his murder, at Saint Timothy's church outside of Philadelphia.
Hundreds of friends, family, colleagues, and former customers paid their last respects.
At the same time, police got their first break.
A worker found a .25 caliber bullet in the parking lot across the street from the General Wayne Inn.
It was the same brand as the shell that killed Jim Webb.
Police wondered whether the killer through the gun in the dumpster, but it was empty.
The trash had been picked up a few days earlier.
Miraculously, police found the truck and went through all of the trash inside.
All 12 tons of it.
Pretty much, in overalls, digging through garbage and trash all day.
Some of the worse smells I've ever smelled in my life and filthy.
But we went through every square inch of the contents of the truck, and didn't come up with the gun.
Another dead end.
Until the victim's wife, Robin Webb, remembered something.
She said she was standing outside the restaurant when Jim's body was taken to the morgue.
And his business partner, Guy Sileo, walked over to offer his condolences.
Guy came out of the building, and the first thing I noticed was that he had sunglasses on.
And then he said, who would have want to shoot Jim?
Inadvertently revealing information known only to police and the killer.
Only those of us who are very close to the investigation knew that fact.
That immediately puts your eye on him.
How could he possibly know that when even the medically trained nurse thought that he'd fallen?
And police discovered something else.
Several restaurant employees said Sileo owned a second or .25 caliber handgun that he didn't admit to police.
Sileo owned a second or .25 caliber handgun that he didn't admit to police.
And one of the witnesses told us was, an older model weapon that's Sileo said that was unregistered that he'd gotten from his grandfather who brought over from Italy after the war.
Ken Norcutt, a former suspect and ex-employee told police he remembered it distinctly.
Norcutt gave us a very good description of the gun that Sileo had.
He described it as a Beretta with a tip-up barrel.
And in particular, Norcutt, who had military experience, told us that he remembers what he called the Trident seal.
But Sileo denied ever owning a Beretta handgun.
He's a smooth customer.
And I knew he was lying, but he did it with a bold face, and very good at it.
In Sileo's office, police found a box of .25 caliber ammunition, the same caliber used in Jim's murder.
Analyst Gene Krebs compared Sileo's ammunition to the spent cartridge found at the murder scene.
He was looking for marks made by a bunter.
A bunter mark is made by a tool at the point of manufacturer.
The manufacturer's name, or abbreviation, or initials will be stamped on the head of the cartridge case, as well as the caliber of the ammunition that's being created.
The tool marks on the two were similar.
Meaning, the ammunition was manufactured in the same factory on the same day.
But there are, on average, 100,000 cartridge cases struck by the same bunter.
So it's conceivable that many boxes of ammunition could have cartridges struck by the bunter.
Without the murder weapon, the trail turned cold.
Two years pass without any new leads.
We always try to keep a positive attitude on it.
The progress in this case was very slow.
Everybody that was involved in the case stuck with it, through the years.
But Chief Investigator Rich Nilsen wouldn't give up.
He was intent on solving the case, and found inspiration in a most unusual place.
There comes a point in every investigation that remains unsolved where you just step back and take another fresh look at your evidence.
And I thought that's just pretty remarkable.
And I said, if they can do that to solve a case, there must be something that we have in our evidence room that we can make the same use of.
Diatoms, which are microscopic organisms, couldn't help this case.
But Nilsen wondered about Guy Sileo's holster.
What if there had been another gun in the holster, different from the one Sileo gave police?
If the murder weapon was, in fact, in there at some point in time, there's got to be some sort of transfer of evidence.
With nothing to lose, and everything to gain, Nilsen sent the holster to the forensic lab for testing-- with surprising results.
Nilsen sent the holster to the forensic lab for testing-- with surprising results.
Three weeks before Jim Webb's murder, his business partner, Guy Sileo, purchased a Phoenix Arms .25 caliber handgun.
Forensic testing proved it wasn't the murder weapon.
But a year earlier, several restaurant employees saw Sileo with a different .25 caliber handgun-- a Beretta.
Sileo denied it.
So police asked one of his employees to wear a hidden microphone and ask him about the Beretta pistol.
You still got that Beretta?
It didn't work, anyway.
Well, bingo.
No you have him admitting on a wiretap that he lied to the police when he said he never own another .25 caliber gun.
Police decided to analyze Sileo's leather gun holster to see if it showed any evidence that had once held a Beretta.
The main thing that stuck in my head was, if it was in there, it might have left an impression.
And that impression might be good enough to tell us what kind of gun was in there before.
Forensic analysts removed the stitching to see inside.
The highest part of the firearm, that's the area that will be in contact with the inside of the the leather of the holster.
Investigators saw the impressions from the Phoenix arms pistol, but they found something else.
There were two different brands of firearms that had been stored in the holster.
A second gun left deep impressions stained with dirt.
One corresponding to a release lever and a hinge for a tip-up barrel, a rare feature on guns.
Another showed a raised slide and a larger than usual trigger Only one type of handgun could have made all these impressions, a Beretta Model 20, the same gun witnesses saw Sileo carrying.
Only one type of handgun could have made all these impressions, a Beretta Model 20, the same gun witnesses saw Sileo carrying.
When we looked at that gun and looked at the impressions on the inside of the holster, it appeared that a logo on the gun, as well as a safety switch on gun, it appeared there were matching impressions inside the holster.
That was wonderful information for us, because it confirmed all of the witness statements that we had that put a .25 caliber Beretta in Sileo's hands prior to the murder.
Beretta in Sileo's hands prior to the murder.
Guy Sileo was arrested and charged with first-degree murder.
It was clear the train was rolling towards Sileo from the beginning.
He was on the tracks and the light just kept getting closer and closer.
And eventually it got to him.
Prosecutors believed the motive was financial.
The General Wayne Inn was losing money, and Jim Webb planned to close it, dissolve his business partnership with Sileo and move on.
Jim had actually discussed with the restaurant lawyer that after the first of the year we were just going to walk away.
Prosecutors say Sileo decided to kill Webb for the $650,000 of life insurance money before Webb could end the partnership.
From what I have learned about Mr. Sileo, he is the last person in the world you would want for a friend or a partner.
And tragically, that mis-estimation, I suppose, by Mr. Webb, given the events, cost him his life.
I suppose, by Mr. Webb, given the events, cost him his life.
Sileo knew employees would remember his .25 caliber Beretta, and that police would come the ballistics.
Beretta, and that police would come the ballistics.
So he bought a second gun as an alibi weapon, and waited for his chance.
It came the night after Christmas.
Sileo used the assistant chef, Felicia Moyse, as his alibi.
After work, they made plans to attend a friend's Christmas party.
Felicia confirmed that Jim Webb was alive when they left the restaurant.
But Sileo and Felicia took separate cars to the party.
And Felicia said, she was going to run a quick errand first.
This gave Sileo enough time to turn around and return to the restaurant.
The evidence suggests Sileo parked his car across the street.
There, he checked his Beretta, accidentally ejecting the live round that was later found near the dumpster.
Hey, Jim, it's, uh, just me.
I forgot something.
The indentations on Sileo's holster proved it held a Beretta.
But where he's disposed of the gun remains a mystery.
Sileo got to the Christmas party before Felicia, further establishing his alibi.
Prosecutors don't believe that Felicia had anything to do with the murder.
But they think she realized she had been used.
And that this led to her suicide.
Well, I think that she probably believed that Guy murdered Jim, and that she wasn't able to live with that horrible knowledge.
Was at worth it?
I think he thought he was invincible and that he would never get caught.
And do I think he regrets it?
Probably no.
I would probably say he's, like, denying it in his head.
Because that's kind of the way he is.
I hate him.
I hate him.
Five years after Jim Webb's death, Guy Sileo was tried and convicted of first-degree murder and sentenced to life in prison.
Guy Sileo was tried and convicted of first-degree murder and sentenced to life in prison.
He still maintains his innocence.
But the jury understood the story told by the forensic evidence.
The fact that the Beretta fits into that holster, fits in with the theory that other witnesses had told us that the murder weapon was a Beretta.
The ballistics expert tells us that the cartridge casing that was found next Jim's body could have been ejected from a Beretta.
That the projectile that was found under the skin in James forehead could have been fired through a Beretta.
We had a lot of interviews with people they've confirmed the existence of Sileo's gun, the Beretta.
But when you have forensic evidence to back it up, that's extremely key, because that doesn't lie in court.
Washington, DC is a city steeped in history.
Little known is that it's home to one of the largest arson sprees in US history.
In setting hundreds of fires, the arsonist left clues to his identity.
And in the ashes scientists found them.
Just before dawn, there was a house fire in a middle class suburb of Washington, DC.
Firefighters put it out before anyone was hurt.
But it was clear, it was deliberately set.
There was someone in the home at the time.
He had to have know it.
And he didn't seem to care.
The fire originated on the front porch where investigators found remnants of a melted plastic gallon container and a cloth wick.
There was some fabric material that was present, which turned out to be consistent with an athletic sock.
This was the second fire in the city in less than a Both had been set the same way, with an accelerant inside a plastic one-gallon container.
Both had been set the same way, with an accelerant inside a plastic one-gallon container.
A gas chromatography test of the debris identified the accelerant as gasoline.
They were being set in the early morning hours between hours of 2:00 AM and 6:00 AM.
They were occurring at single family residences.
And the origin of the fire was being found either on the front porch or the rear porch of these homes.
The cloth wick gave the arsonist plenty of time to get away.
None of us had seen that type of device We were so used to having Molotov cocktails where they were lighting them and throwing them against the structure.
We were so used to having Molotov cocktails where they were lighting them and throwing them against the structure.
This was one that was actually being placed against a structure.
And basically you're lighting it and walking away.
Investigators from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, or a ATF, found another interesting item in the debris.
Remnants of plastic shopping bags revealed how the arsonist carried the containers of gasoline and avoided detection.
And when you're dealing with one individual who has showed a pattern of using a device, which we had not seen on the streets very frequently.
We knew that it was going to be a very difficult case.
Investigators urged citizens to be on the lookout for individuals carrying plastic shopping bags in the middle of the night between 2:00 and 6:00 AM.
The public needs to know this.
They need to know they have a serial arsonist in their neighborhood.
Just like you need to know there's a rapist working your neighborhood.
But it didn't help.
Over the next two weeks, there were four more fires, all within a few miles of one another, all set with gasoline inside a plastic gallon container placed on a porch.
Investigators asked the surrounding fire departments to compile a list of all suspicious fires over the past year that started on the front porch of a home between 2:00 and 6 o'clock in the morning.
The results were astonishing.
They were 20 additional fires, all set when people were inside the homes.
This has been going on for a year or two years.
And we want to know, now, what's going on.
We want the answers.
Tragically, one of those fires claimed a life.
86-year-old Lou Edna Jones was unable to get out of her home and died of smoke inhalation.
She had five children, 15 grandchildren, and 20 great-grandchildren.
All were traumatized by this senseless act of violence.
I have been so heartbroken.
I will never be the same again.
Since that-- and I mean, the way she left here.
A senseless death, because someone wanted their kicks to sit back and watch a fire.
How cold-hearted could you be?
This is a first-degree murder.
We knew that, not only had he killed one person that we knew of in the past, was it going to happen again?
The ATF and the local fire investigators formed a task force to find the arsonist setting the Washington, DC fires.
There were 20 fires set with plastic gallon containers full of gasoline and cloth socks used as wicks.
To gain some insight into the identity of the arsonist, investigators called in Ron Tunkel, an a ATF criminal profiler.
Well, how a person acts in the commission of their crimes is a reflection of how they will act in their day-to-day noncriminal lives.
When we look at a crime scene, we're looking for the more emotional clues left behind.
In this case, the fires were set in predominantly black neighborhoods.
For Tunkel this was a crucial piece of information.
We're probably dealing with a black offender.
A white offender or an Asian offender probably would have stood out.
Tunkel believed the arsonist was very skilled and organized, most likely a male in his late 20's to early 40's, and was probably unmarried since the fires were set between 2:00 and 6 o'clock in the morning.
Investigators were convinced that the arsonist followed his exploits on the news and knew in that in one of his fires he'd killed someone.
Setting so many fires, terrorizing so many people, he's right up there with some of the great criminal minds, or terrible criminal minds, that we've dealt with in the Washington area.
If we didn't take him off the street, he wasn't going to stop. [siren] And that's what happened.
And that's what happened.
A few months later, there was a fire in a nearby apartment building.
Over 100 residents were evacuated safely.
The fire started on the fourth floor using the incendiary device.
There were multiple one-gallon containers of gasoline placed out throughout the hallway.
But this time, investigators got a badly needed break.
One of the residents, 57-year-old Paul DuBois, had some suspicious burns on his hands.
And his clothes smelled of gasoline.
His apartment was on the fourth floor where the fire started.
DuBois had a Ph.D. From Cornell University, was $8,000 behind in his rent, and was about to be evicted when the fire broke out.
Some people got very excited.
This was going to do the serial arsonist when they arrested him-- that that was the guy.
But that didn't ring right to me.
That's because the other fires were set to single dwelling homes.
What was striking was that it was in his own apartment building.
And we began to think that was a little bit inconsistent with everything else that had happened up until that day.
And the incendiary device in Dubois' apartment building was different from the others.
It didn't have a wick.
Was it possible that DuBois was a copycat and learned how to make the device from media reports?
At one point, the media actually put the device on TV, what they thought was being used.
And that was particularly hard for us to deal with as a task force, because now potentially anybody can go out there, recreate this, and we would not know if we're dealing with the arsonist or a copycat.
But while DuBois was in custody,  The fires continued.
Investigators concluded that DuBois set the fire in his apartment building, but that was it.
Mr. Paul DuBois was not the serial arsonist, however, responsible for setting the fire in his apartment complex.
He was not the arsonist we were looking for.
Well, we learned a lot about his background and his life, which was certainly colorful.
But it was pretty clear, within weeks I would say, that this was not going to be the person that was responsible for these fires.
I would say, that this was not going to be the person that was responsible for these fires.
However, DuBois was convicted of setting his apartment building on fire and was sentenced to 12 years in prison.
Over the next two months, there was a fire in every week.
By this time, there were over 30 of them.
Then investigators found something.
A piece of the cloth wick survived one of the fires.
Was it possible that the arsonist may have left his DNA on the burnt cloth?
If so, scientists hoped they could find it.
In most of the fires set by the Washington, DC arsonist, the incendiary device went up in flames.
But in one case, a piece of the wick, which was a cloth sock survived.
On a hunch, scientists swabbed the cloth with sterile water, put the swab in a vial, and added a digest buffer that eliminates everything except humans cells.
Miraculously, the sock contained skin cells.
And they provided a DNA profile presumably of the arsonist.
To have such good DNA results for an arson case is pretty remarkable.
When you think about the quality of the evidence in terms of how burned, or how much heat it may have been subjected to, it's excellent to be able to obtain results.
Why were skin cells on the sock?
The arsonist hadn't laundered it.
Unfortunately, the DNA profile did not match any in the database of known criminal offenders.
But investigators got another huge break.
Three young men, coming home from work around 2:00 AM, saw someone sitting on their porch.
Initially, they thought he was a burglar and chased him away.
Hey, you! What the hell you doing?
Waiting for Carlos?
Carlos? Carlos who?
I must have the wrong place. -Yeah, you must.
What's happening? -He said he had the wrong place.
Afterwards, they found a shopping bag with a plastic container filled with gasoline and a sock tied around the handle.
This is our chance.
We finally have an eyewitness, not only one, but we have three.
Three witnesses that had a conversation with what, in our minds, was the serial arsonist.
Analysts went over every inch of the bag and the plastic container and got yet another break.
They didn't find fingerprints.
But sticking to the outside of the container was a single human hair.
So at that point, we had a hair.
We didn't know where the hair came from.
The hair was consistent with an African American.
American.
And it contained the root.
DNA testing of the hair root matched the DNA from the burned wick.
The three men described the suspect as a middle-aged black male with short hair, approximately six feet tall.
Police released this composite sketch to the media.
But the arsons continued.
We realize as that process wore on, it was much more likely that this case was going to be solved forensically than through any sort of eyewitness testimony.
Then the arsonist changed his pattern.
Instead of using white plastic shopping bags to carry the incendiary devices, he switched to black ones.
These were uncommon.
The bottom of the black back, read in part, made in China for the Cornelius Shop, that portion of the bag survived the fire.
The ATF spoke with the manufacturer in China and learned that only two stores in the Washington, DC area bought these black shopping bags.
Both stories were in the general vicinity of the arson fires.
And the owners agreed to help with the investigation.
The store owner provided us access to his store, to his products.
We established 24-hour surveillance, physical and video surveillance, on both of these locations.
And investigators came up with a way to individualize every bag the stores used.
The task force purchased a series of alphanumeric steel chips.
These steel chips had thermal testing done on them and would survive future fire scenes.
They fastened a different numbered chip on to the bottom of each bag.
If investigators found one of these chips at a fire, the number would identify the date, time, and location of the store.
And security cameras would show every individual buying plastic gallon containers in that time frame.
As the black bags were put into circulation, investigators discovered something else.
An arson dog detected gasoline on a pair of military dress pants discarded across the street from one of the fires.
They were the type worn by the Marines.
Scientists swabbed the waistband and discovered human skin cells.
The DNA profile of these skin cells matched the hair found on the incendiary device and the skin cells from the burned wick.
The arsonist either is a current member of the Marine Corps, a former member of the Marine Corps, or has a close association with the Marine Corps.
So what do we do?
We go to the Marine Corps.
Fire investigators contacted the Naval Criminal Investigation Service about the pair of Marine pants found across the street from one of the arson fires.
Investigation Service about the pair of Marine pants found across the street from one of the arson fires.
When we went down to the Naval yard to meet with the NCIS investigators, I think we had fairly thin hopes that they were actually going to bring us a suspect.
I think we had fairly thin hopes that they were actually going to bring us a suspect.
But that opinion was a bit premature.
Naval investigators said they too were searching for a serial arsonist who had been setting fires to cars in a parking lot used by military personnel.
A surveillance videotape showed a man leaving the scene in his car.
From the license plate, he was identified as 55-year-old Thomas Sweatt, a civilian who had a friend in the Marines.
Thomas Sweatt, a civilian who had a friend in the Marines.
Sweatt was unmarried and worked as the night manager of a fast food restaurant.
Never heard Thomas Sweatt's name.
When I found out who he was, I'd been in his restaurant, in that fast food restaurant, in Northeast Washington many times.
I was there on the opening day of baseball in Washington.
He probably served me or was there.
But I didn't know it.
Sweatt was never charged in the military fires because there was insufficient evidence against him.
There was not really enough information, at this point of the investigation of Mr. Sweatt, to get a search warrant, to get court permission, to get his DNA.
So the arson task force put Sweatt under 24-hour surveillance.
In doing so, they discovered Sweatt lived near the food store that used the black shopping bags.
It's kind of like Christmas morning.
You're like, oh my goodness, I can't believe this.
We might be finished with this.
When Sweatt was brought in for questioning, he denied any involvement and willingly provided a DNA sample for testing.
Frankly, if he had not consented, that might have been a red flag where we would have focused even more heavily on Mr. Sweatt.
But he did consent.
And that gave us the opportunity to do a fairly speedy analysis to see if he was, in fact, excluded or included as the serial arsonist.
His DNA matched the hair, the military pants, and the most incriminating of all, the skin cells on the burnt wick.
Mr. Sweatt didn't realize that DNA could be recovered from a fire that he had previously set.
You got to remember, he's operating for a very long period of time, on the run, offending, eluding this massive manhunt.
He may have been worn out.
And that may have contributed.
When he learned of the DNA evidence against him, Thomas Sweatt confessed to not only the recent fires, but some dating back 25 years.
Thomas Sweatt confessed to not only the recent fires, but some dating back 25 years.
It was a very emotional time.
It was a very emotional interview.
During that time, Mr. Sweatt has provided us with over 350 fires in which he is responsible.
The fact that Mr. Sweat had been undetected, had been untouched for a period of 25 years, he is a prolific serial arsonist.
This could potentially be the largest serial arsonist in the history of the United States.
Two people died in those fires and dozens more were injured.
It was a pretty astounding moment for all of us.
You always hope that the case is going to be solved.
But when it actually happens, there is a kind of moment of stunned silence.
Investigators think Sweatt had second thoughts about setting some of these fires, which explains why the young men saw him sitting on the porch.
We'll never know what's Sweatt told investigators about the motive for the fires.
He asked for, and received, a promise of confidentiality in exchange for his guilty plea.
About the only thing that came out in court was that Sweatt said, he heard voices, and that he set fires to relieve stress.
If the demons in your head told you to set a fire, if you were so stressed out that you had to set a fire, why didn't you set your own mother's house on fire?
So see that's where you can't say this man was insane.
He had very good sense.
He had sense enough not to get caught.
Thomas Sweatt was sentenced to two consecutive life terms without parole plus another 135 years in prison, all because of that rarest of forensic clues, DNA, that survived the heat of a fire.
DNA, that survived the heat of a fire.
Just because of the nature of an arson scene, the nature of the fire, to find basically any evidence, is remarkable.
To find some DNA evidence, that is usable DNA evidence and being able to have that evidence analyzed and go towards the case and to help solve that case, is great.
The forensic evidence is proof that even in a fire, a criminal leaves some kind of trail.
The trick is to find it.
There aren't many cases that are, in history, of this magnitude and investigative techniques that were used, the task force concept, how well it worked, I mean, it really is a model that you're not going to see in any other area.
In many respects, he was a guerrilla fighter.
But he was up against a superior army.
And there was no way he could win.
So sooner or later, he would be caught.
Three homicides continents apart all look like professional executions.
Were they related?
Interpol, the FBI, and local law enforcement search for the answer.
They found it in an old typewriter and a used piece of tape.
On a January morning in 1994, a surveyor charted land in North Carolina's Blue Ridge Mountains.
Blue Ridge Mountains.
The work is time consuming and exacting.
On this day, however, he saw more than the topography of the landscape.
In the snow, the surveyor found the body of a middle-aged man.
It was completely nude.
There was two obvious gunshot wounds.
One to the neck and one to the head of the victim.
It was clear this was an execution-style killing perpetrated by a professional.
The primary reason that clothing would be removed from a body at a crime scene would be to get rid of any trace evidence.
But the killer left one potential clue.
A few feet from the body investigators found a 16-inch piece of black electrical tape.
It appeared to have a small hole in it that would be consistent with a gunshot hole, some red droplets which we later confirmed to be blood, and some human head hair on the piece of tape.
Apparently, the tape had been used to gag him.
The blood and hair were from the victim.
A check of missing persons reports identified him as 40-year-old Victor Gunnarsson-- a Swedish citizen who had been living in the United States for the last several years.
Gunnarsson was well known to international law enforcement.
A few years earlier he was the chief suspect in one of the greatest unsolved murder cases of the 20th century-- the assassination of Swedish Prime Minister Olof Palme This assassination has shaken the very foundations of Swedish society.
This assassination has shaken the very foundations of Swedish society.
The people here are used to violence in other people's cities, not their own.
They used to be able to say it could never happen here.
Now it has, and they are not quite sure how to cope with it.
It happened on a bitter, cold night in 1986.
Olof Palme and his wife went to the movies.
They had given their bodyguards the night off.
As they walked out of the theater, witnesses said a man approached them.
They had a brief conversation.
As Palme walked away, the man fired two shots into his back.
Olof Palme had been shot straight through the spinal column-- straight through the aorta.
Olof Palme was actually dead before he hit the ground.
Swedish officials suspected Victor Gunnarsson was involved.
Victor Gunnarsson was involved.
He was a right-wing extremist, he matched the general description of the assassin, and witnesses saw him in a bar near the movie theater that evening voicing his hatred of Palme and his politics.
But when none of the eyewitnesses could pick him out of the police lineup, he was released.
The name to Victor Gunnarsson became a hated one in Sweden.
And Gunnarsson became a pariah.
It was impossible for him to find paid employment.
People screamed murderer at him in the streets.
And he realized that he couldn't live on in Sweden.
Gunnarsson fled to the United States.
And now eight years later he was on an autopsy table in North Carolina.
There is a conspiracy theories saying that the CIA had Olof Palme murdered and that they employed Victor Gunnarsson as the hit man.
And then, of course, it was the CIA who bumped off Victor Gunnarsson in Salisbury, North Carolina to tie up loose ends Either way, investigators on two continents were very interested in finding Gunnarsson's killer.
North Carolina to tie up loose ends Either way, investigators on two continents were very interested in finding Gunnarsson's killer.
Either way, investigators on two continents were very interested in finding Gunnarsson's killer.
Victor Gunnarsson fled Sweden after he was questioned in connection with the assassination of the Prime Minister, Olof Palme.
He settled in the small town of Salisbury, North Carolina and found work as a language tutor.
According to friends, he liked the United States a lot.
Victor had quite a reputation as a ladies man.
He was a very handsome man.
He was also known to just walk up to any stranger and start up a conversation and end up going home, visiting with them for several days.
Sometimes Victor Gunnarsson tried to attract his lady friends by claiming to be a famous American film director who would make them stars.
At other times he produced a fake FBI badge from his wallet saying he was a secret agent on a mission.
During the autopsy, the medical examiner confirmed that Gunnarsson was killed with a .22 caliber weapon.
And he also found the clue about the time of death.
In the case of Mr. Gunnarsson I found what I recognized or thought to be potato skins which would indicate that his last meal he had something like a baked potato.
I found what I recognized or thought to be potato skins which would indicate that his last meal he had something like a baked potato.
Undigested food meant that Gunnarsson was killed within four hours of his last meal.
The last known person to see Gunnarsson alive was a girlfriend Kay Weden, a local school teacher.
She was able to confirm a time that they ate and able to confirm the fact that at the time they ate that Victor Gunnarsson had in fact consumed the potatoes.
Kay Weden said Gunnarsson dropped her off at home around 11:00 PM, and she never saw him again.
Victor and I said good night right on the front porch stoop of my house, and he kissed me good night.
We do believe he made it back to his apartment that night because his vehicle was parked in front of the apartment as he customarily parked it.
There were no signs of forced entry to Gunnarsson's apartment or any kind of a struggle.
With Olof Palme's assassination still unsolved, Swedish authorities kept close tabs on the investigation.
Swedish authorities kept close tabs on the investigation.
They were interested in what we found in Victor's apartment, in his writings, and that kind of thing.
But we do not come across anything that would link him directly to the assassination.
Four days after Gunnarsson's murder, Kay Weden experienced another tragedy.
Kay Weden experienced another tragedy.
Her 77-year-old mother, Catherine Miller, was gunned down in her home.
There was no forced entry.
It was apparently someone she knew or someone she trusted.
She had allowed that person to come in.
And the person had shot her as she stood there at the stove fixing her supper.
Like Gunnarsson, Miller was shot twice in the head execution-style.
But it wasn't with the same weapon.
This was a .38 caliber.
In a matter of days, two people close to Kay Weden were murdered.
And Kay told police that she too had reason to fear for her life.
For the past year she had been receiving threatening letters and phone calls.
In another, the caller demanded $2,000 dollars and said if it wasn't paid, her son would be hurt.
I didn't know who would have done anything like that.
And again, it's very difficult to be afraid when you don't know who or what to be afraid of.
Kay told investigators she didn't have any enemies only an ex-fiance, LC Underwood, a retired police officer who behaved badly after their breakup.
I was dating a gentleman for the first time, and we had gone to a restaurant and LC came barging into the restaurant.
And he looked down at the glass of iced tea and looked up, looked at me, and picked it up, and dumped it in my lap.
Since then, however, Kay said her relationship with Underwood had improved.
And it wasn't Underwood's voice on those threatening telephone calls.
Police wanted to interview LC Underwood about this matter, but he refused.
When they checked Underwood's whereabouts for the night of Victor Gunnarsson's murder, they learned he called a friend in the police department asking him to run a license plate number.
A few hours later Victor Gunnarsson was dead.
Homicide investigators usually don't believe in coincidence.
Not long after Kay Weden breaks off her engagement to LC Underwood, she starts receiving threatening letters and telephone calls.
Shortly after that, both her mother and new boyfriend are murdered.
A background check revealed Underwood had three failed marriages and several women had filed complaints against him.
It became apparent that he had problems in dealing with women.
He had a past history of stalking, of harassing women, of vandalizing personal items owned by these women when the relationships began to sour.
To see if Underwood was behind the threatening letters sent to Kay Weden's home, police confiscated Underwood's electric typewriter and send it to document examiner David Dunn.
This ribbon could have been in the typewriter for months, possibly years.
It will go through the machine one time and one time only.
It leaves a permanent record of the document that was typed with that ribbon.
The ribbon on this typewriter moves up and down.
So the letters strike the ribbon in vertical columns.
It was a ribbon that had a three-strike pattern.
In other words, the type element typed in three rows of letters.
Dunn searched the ribbon for words or phrases that appeared in the threatening letters to Kay Weden.
A key phrase was "roses are red" which appeared numerous times.
As I was reading and looking at the ribbon, all of a sudden I see damn, "the roses are red."
I said I think I have the document.
But as any examiner will know, you can't just stop as soon as you find one or two words.
Dunn found whole sentences from the letters.
And there was no doubt they had been typed on Underwood's typewriter.
I had no idea.
I was completely and totally flabbergasted when the detectives told me that LC Was responsible for sending the letters.
Was responsible for sending the letters.
With a warrant, investigators searched Underwood's home and found it was spotless.
He was obsessive almost to the point of being too clean.
He would vacuum right after you left a room.
He would empty the ashtray right after you used it, and everything was to the point of almost too perfect.
There was nothing suspicious within view.
And investigators didn't find any firearms.
But in the laundry room behind the washer they found some black electrical tape wrapped around the exhaust pipe.
Magnified 50 times, it looked like the same kind of tape found near Gunnarsson's body.
We look at the width.
We look at the thickness.
We look at the composition of the backing and the composition of the adhesive.
A Fourier-transformed infrared analysis provided even more information.
If you're passing an the infrared beam through the material, or if you're using a reflectance, you're bouncing the infrared beam off the surface.
And you're looking at the total absorbance.
In both tape samples, there were identical amount of absorption.
This meant the tape in Underwood's home was the same brand and possibly from the same roll as the piece used to gag Victor Gunnarsson.
It does indicate it's possible they came from the same roll or from the same manufacturer.
Finally, investigators checked Underwood's car.
A few days after the murders of Victor Gunnarsson and Catherine Miller, Underwood, in two different trips took both of these vehicles to Sam's Car Wash.
He instructed the person there at the car wash to give him the works.
That is, to completely clean the vehicle-- vacuum the trunk.
They found what looked like scuff marks in the trunk, although, the trunk liner was spotless.
The investigator used fiber tape to pick up any loose items.
The liner was so clean he was about to give up.
Then he saw something embedded deep in the fibers.
When I spotted it, I am going how in the world can I not see it first time going through it.
I not see it first time going through it.
When I saw the hair there, I took another piece of tape out and try to blot it off, and it would not come off on my lip.
They were matted down into the surface of the mat in one particular area.
So he pulled each hair out individually.
All told there were 16 strands of hair.
Since none had the root, nuclear DNA testing was impossible.
But they tried a less definitive test of the mitochondria.
Mitochondria contain genetic information that exists outside the cell nucleus.
FBI scientists ran two sets of tests-- the first on the trunk hair the second on Gunnarsson's blood.
The result like these demonstration tests was a perfect match.
It had the same mitochondrial DNA sequence as the known blood sample from Victor Gunnarsson.
Therefore, Victor Gunnarsson could not be eliminated as a source of those hairs.
Solid proof that Gunnarsson had been inside Underwood's trunk.
It was not really a reaction of shock and surprise.
It was more of an expectation that this ultimately is what we were going to find.
That was most satisfying and probably the happiest day during the course of the investigation that I had.
LC Underwood was arrested and charged with murder.
He insisted, however, that he was innocent.
Prosecutors now had proof that LC Underwood sent the threatening letters to Kay Weden.
He also owned electrical tape that matched tape found near Victor Gunnarsson's body.
And Gunnarson's head hair was found in his trunk.
Prosecutors don't think the motive was revenge, but jealousy.
Despite the breakup, Underwood wanted Kay Weden back in his life.
Kay Weden back in his life.
So we tried to create as much havoc in her life as possible, thinking it would create vulnerability.
Kay Weden was very dependent on her mother, as many people are.
If Catherine Miller and Victor Gunnarsson were both eliminated, Kay Weden had only LC Underwood to turn to.
Underwood typed the threatening letters on his work typewriter and had someone else make the threatening phone calls.
But that plan didn't work.
Underwood apparently was stalking Kay.
He drove by Kay's home one night and didn't recognize the strange car parked in front.
I need you to run a 1028 for me.
A David Paul William 7098, Underwood traced the license plate number and had all the information he needed.
Underwood traced the license plate number and had all the information he needed.
He went to Gunnarsson's apartment, abducted him at gunpoint, forced him into the trunk of his car, and drove to a deserted location 90 miles away.
Underwood marched him into the woods, ordered him to remove his clothes, and killed him.
He removed as much evidence as he could but dropped a piece of tape that matched tape found inside his home.
He also had his car thoroughly washed inside and out.
But 16 of Gunnarsson's head hairs remained.
Victor Gunnarsson was simply a victim of very, very bad timing in his life.
He had only known Kay Weden for two to three weeks at the time he was murdered-- did not know anything about LC Underwood.
Prosecutors say Underwood went to Kay's mother's home a few days later and killed her too.
There were several witnesses who had seen Mr. Underwood possess a .38 caliber Colt snub nose revolver.
And that revolver also had been loaned to another friend of his, and on the night of Catherine Miller's murder, LC Underwood had gone to that person and reclaimed that particular firearm.
LC Underwood had gone to that person and reclaimed that particular firearm.
So we felt that that was in fact the .38 caliber weapon that killed Catherine Miller.
But investigators were never able to recover either murder weapon.
The jury found LC Underwood guilty of Victor Gunnarsson's murder.
Gunnarsson's murder.
He was sentenced to life in prison without parole.
He was very diligent in covering his tracks.
And had it not been for modern technology, we may not have been able to convict him perhaps without the evidence that we now have.
I don't think that he ever would have been caught if it hadn't been for the forensics evidence and the mitochondrial DNA used in Victor's case.
A bomb explosion often destroys the evidence of where and how the explosive was made.
But microscopic elements do survive.
These tiny fragments often tell a story, and sometimes can identify the perpetrator.
On a warm humid night in 1993, Kurt Simon and his fiancee, Kem Wenger, returned home from a surprise engagement shower.
Kurt Simon and his fiancee, Kem Wenger, returned home from a surprise engagement shower.
They wanted to unpack the car quickly and get to bed since they both had busy schedules for the following day.
I had felt the concussion of this thing hit me in waves.
I had looked down and I had noticed a pair of legs.
Then it all of a sudden occurred to me that this was Kem, and, yeah, she was obviously-- obviously dead.
And the neighbors were all starting to come over, and I had screamed to them to call 911.
Investigators noticed pieces of metal in Kem's left hand, an indication that the bomb was detonated with a motion sensor device.
There was something in the foyer there that she knew was out of place.
And she bent over to either move it or pick it up, and that's when it detonated.
There was evidence that it was a pipe bomb.
By the pipe bomb fragments, there was also added shrapnel to the bomb.
They found ball bearings, were later determined to be hunting shot.
Investigators found a hole in the foyer floor almost a foot wide and deep.
Metal fragments were embedded in the walls and ceiling.
There was shrapnel as far away as across the street, into various segments of the house, blown both backwards and forwards into the kitchen, which is in a straight line from the foyer.
In the basement, investigators found wires, gunpowder, and fuses-- proof that the bomb had been made in this house.
The bomber obviously left all that material down there thinking that, you know, the house may be destroyed.
Nobody would ever find it.
Nobody would ever see him come and go from the house.
In the kitchen were battery wrappers.
Batteries were used in the bomb.
But most importantly, a pair of gloves.
So the speculation was the bomb construction was finalized at the house, the person threw the paper debris and the gloves in the garbage, and then left.
It was clear that the perpetrator was someone who had access to the house.
Kurt Simon could have placed the bomb in the foyer prior to Kem coming in.
By going in the house first, he could have taken something out of a suitcase, and set it on the floor, and walked back out.
Could have.
Wait a minute.
Wait a minute.
You're thinking I had something to do with this?
Kurt was unable to provide any information about the bombing because he said he didn't see anything suspicious.
The next thing I remembered was being grabbed by a couple of police officers, handcuffed, pulled to the front of the house, and paraded in front of this crowd of people into a police car.
Kurt had his own suspicions about who killed his fiancee.
He pointed the finger at Kem's mother, Cricket.
If you take every kind of evil, roll it up into a ball, there you have Cricket Lewis.
Cricket was just depraved, and evil, terribly, terribly self-centered.
What I do know is, does Cricket have the capabilities and the depravity to do something like that?
Absolutely.
Absolutely.
Cricket-- hope I'm not shot for this-- but I mean, Cricket made her money on her back.
Cricket made her money on her back.
I mean, yes, she had a bar.
But I think that the bar that she had was bought from the inheritance of an old lady that she took care that, of course, died under her care.
Investigators had suspects.
All they needed now was some hard evidence.
29-year-old Kem Wenger was killed when a pipe bomb exploded in her Bloomington, Illinois, home.
Kem was divorced with two children, and worked both as a hairdresser and occasionally a house cleaner.
It was creepy because here's this decent person, who has not done anything to deserve anything like this, murdered in a very heinous way.
She's the type that she would sit down with a bowl of popcorn and soda, and watch a good scary movie.
That was her Saturday night.
She loved it.
She was so much fun.
And yes, I miss her terribly.
At the time of her death, Kem was engaged to Kurt Simon, a Presbyterian minister who was now a suspect in her murder.
Kem was engaged to Kurt Simon, a Presbyterian minister who was now a suspect in her murder.
Just the thought that somebody would kill her was just beyond belief.
The other suspect in Kem's murder was her own mother, Cricket Lewis.
Kem had a strained relationship with her mother.
They barely spoke to one another.
And witnesses said Cricket behaved badly at her daughter's funeral.
While everybody else was crying, and reliving Kem's memory, and just basically not able to do much because everybody was so distraught, Cricket just kept complaining that Kem let her life insurance policy lapse, and that nobody's going to get any money out of this.
Kem's memory, and just basically not able to do much because everybody was so distraught, Cricket just kept complaining that Kem let her life insurance policy lapse, and that nobody's going to get any money out of this.
Cricket just kept complaining that Kem let her life insurance policy lapse, and that nobody's going to get any money out of this.
You can't judge by reactions at the funeral though.
You just-- because people express loss in very different ways.
I mean, some people laugh at funerals and some people cry at funerals.
Like Kurt Simon, Cricket Lewis denied any involvement in her daughter's murder.
When all of the bomb fragments were recovered, investigators found some distinctive features.
The explosive charge had been wrapped with metal ball bearings, or BBs, which increased its killing power.
When the bomb explodes, they would be traveling at very high rate of speed.
There'll be several hundred pieces of either metal or, in this case, metal and BBs, would be projected towards its intended victim.
Gas chromatography testing revealed that two different types of gunpowder had been used.
We won't reveal the specific components except to say there may have been a motive for the mixture.
It would create a more powerful explosion, yes.
The sheer power of the device indicated that Kem's fiance, Kurt, may have been a target as well.
This bomb was strong enough to kill several people.
I do believe that Kem was the intended target.
But I also believe that, you know, had I been standing in the room and killed by this thing, that that would have just been considered a bonus.
Investigators didn't think Kurt knew how to build a bomb, let alone one with a motion sensor device and so much power.
Kurt knew how to build a bomb, let alone one with a motion sensor device and so much power.
One of the end caps had two holes drilled in it, which was very unique.
At the time of my evaluation of the evidence, there were more than a handful of pipe bombs involving an end cap with multiple holes drilled in, and over 20,000 entries in our database.
So it made it very unique.
I don't think Kurt Simon could make a bomb if his life depended on it.
For the same reason, Kem's mother, Cricket, was eliminated as a suspect.
We didn't feel she had the ability, the mentality, to build such a device.
I think she was preoccupied by her own personal problems.
The next logical suspect was Kem's ex-husband, Paul.
He lived only two miles away, and he knew Kem's schedule because they shared custody of their daughter.
Anytime someone's divorced, and you're going to look and see who would have the motive.
Who would be motivated to hurt someone else?
You know? What's the past history there?
There was a little dispute as far as custody, and some support that was being given to Kem financially.
So there was some potential there for a motive.
Paul said he was with his friends and daughter for the entire weekend.
And they all corroborated his alibi.
Next, investigators learn that one of Kem's former coworkers, Phil Hartman, may have had the motive.
Phil Hartman, may have had the motive.
Kem had filed a sexual harassment complaint against Hartman, alleging that he continued to make sexual advances towards her even after management ordered him to stop.
Hartman was fired and promised to get even.
He did make some statements about, I'll get you for this, I'll get back at you, something like that.
I'll get back at you, something like that.
So he became a person of interest right away.
But Hartman was in another state when Kem was murdered.
And he had an airtight alibi.
He was actually working at the time of the explosion.
And he had several witnesses, several people, who could testify the fact that he was there, not in the area, had not left the area for several months.
Now, investigators were baffled and realized they would have to look deeper to find out who wanted Kem Wenger and Kurt Simon dead.
I would characterize this as one of the coldest, calculated murders that I've ever been involved with.
In the search for Kem Wenger's killer, investigators had one last suspect to interview-- Dale Fosdick, a former boyfriend and the father of Kem's youngest child.
Dale Fosdick, a former boyfriend and the father of Kem's youngest child.
The relationship between Dale and Kem seemed to be fraught with acrimony.
There was disputes over child visitation and child support.
Friends said that Fosdick didn't always behave as a responsible father.
He often failed to pay child support.
And when he did, it was usually late.
It just got crazy.
She couldn't get a hold of him for days at a time.
He wouldn't acknowledge her.
He wouldn't-- wouldn't answer her phone calls.
Kurt Simon had offered to adopt the child in order to provide a stable home life.
If he's finding having a son to be a real nuisance, if he's not wanting to take care of him, if he's not wanting to be part of his life, let me do it.
I'll do it with open arms and more-- be more than happy to do it.
Investigators discovered that this made Fosdick angry.
Dale starts getting pushed out of Kemberly Wenger's life.
And he has to sit there and watch her new love, or imagine, her new love while he's being pushed aside, and living in his lonely little apartment on the east side of Bloomington.
Also suspicious, Fosdick worked as a machinist at a nearby Caterpillar plant.
Obviously, he was mechanically inclined.
He had some electrical skills.
He was an airplane model hobbyist.
He put together model airplanes from scratch, including the engine.
Armed with a warrant, investigators searched Fosdick's home.
And in the basement was every possible component to make model airplanes, or possibly a bomb.
All kind of electrical components, microswitches, batteries, wire cutters, wire strippers, wrenches, screwdrivers, everything that you could imagine.
In the kitchen, Fosdick issued what appeared to be a challenge.
He had lined up a series of tools on the kitchen table.
And right next to these tools was a newspaper with Kem Wenger's obituary.
To me, that was sending a very clear message.
The message was, hey, I did it.
Now you prove it.
Investigators collected the tools on the kitchen table for analysis.
They also reviewed Fosdick's credit card receipts for the past six months.
And one item stood out.
Dale Fosdick had purchased several packets of the slingshot BB ammunition in early February and March.
Which was significant because this is the same type of slingshot ammunition that was used in the manufacture of the bomb.
And the handwriting analyst concluded that the signatures on the credit card receipts were indeed those of Mr. Fosdick.
Investigators found some of those BBs in Fosdick's basement, and they were compared to the ones found at the bomb site.
Each one was carefully weighed and measured.
There has to be more to tie this together.
The size and shape of the shot isn't specific enough to be a direct link between the suspect and the bombing.
It's just circumstantial evidence.
Then investigators remembered the shreds of wire found at the bomb site.
I could see tears in the installation, which means that the blade did not come completely together.
So that the installation had to be ripped in places.
And they also had a pair of wire cutters from Fosdick's kitchen table.
Tool mark examiner, John O'Neil noticed that the blades were slightly offset.
This gave him hope that he could identify the tiny imperfections on the blade of the tool.
Every tool has a unique mark.
Even if they're manufactured the same, they will still have a different mark left when they cut an item.
And certainly as one's usage of the item continues, it will become more and more obvious.
We have a manufacturing process that has to sharpen these blades.
And then the use of them and the abuse of them adds accidental marks, which further separate them from their brothers in manufacturing.
O'Neil used Fosdick's wire cutters to strip the insulation from a sample piece of wire.
Then wrapped the ends in silver foil to improve the visibility under the microscope.
He then compared the test wire to the wire recovered from the bomb site.
At 50 times magnification, O'Neil could see that the microscopic striations in the rubber insulation lined up perfectly across both samples.
Clear proof that Fosdick's wire cutters had been used in making the bomb.
To me, this evidence is the strength to say that that tool and whoever held it was the person who manufactured the device that killed an innocent person.
Certain cutting tools he owned were used to cut the wire that was involved in the bomb.
And the wire was at his house as well.
So without saying Dale Fosdick built the bomb, Dale Fosdick built the bomb.
Dale Fosdick built the bomb.
That was our smoking gun.
That was our fingerprint.
Despite his denials, Dale Fosdick was arrested and charged with first degree murder.
We knew we had our man.
What was the motive for killing 29-year-old Kem Wenger?
29-year-old Kem Wenger?
Prosecutors believed Dale Fosdick was angry with Kem for ending their relationship, especially since they had a child together.
Fosdick was also troubled by Kem's desire to gain full custody by having her new fiance, Kurt Simon, adopt the child.
The evidence shows Fosdick designed a pipe bomb with extraordinary power, and took every precaution to avoid detection.
But he inadvertently signed his name to his work by leaving those tool marks on a single piece of wire.
He put together most of the bomb at his house.
But to make sure he didn't blow himself up while transporting it, he did the final assembly in Kem's basement.
He carefully placed the bomb on the foyer floor near a table, where he usually left his child support payments.
And Fosdick may have suspected both Kem and Kurt would enter the house together.
Or perhaps he didn't care which one he killed.
Kurt apparently walked right by the device without noticing it.
But something about the packaging caught Kem's eye.
That's the mother of his own child.
That's a brutal murder.
When Fosdick learned that investigators planned to search his home, he placed his bomb-making tools on the kitchen table, next to Kem's obituary.
In so doing, he provided investigators with the smoking gun and never realized it.
You think of a bomb exploding, and you think of evidence evaporating.
But in fact, you leave a good deal of evidence behind.
We were just able to determine that it, A, it was functioned electrically.
B, it functioned by motion.
And C, it involved a minimum of two microswitches.
Throughout the trial, Fosdick maintained his innocence.
But the jury found the tool mark evidence too strong to overlook.
The jury looked at that.
And I could see a light bulb going off in each one of their heads, saying, I can see it.
I know what they're talking about.
At that point, I saw most of them turn and stare at Dale Fosdick.
And I knew at that point, they had made the determination that in fact, Dale Fosdick was guilty.
I had watched the slides from the electron microscope, and watched to see how he had lined everything up, and had done this work in this painstaking, unbelievably difficult work.
And was able to pin the hard evidence to this bomb, to this killer.
And I thought, I've got some new heroes now.
These guys did a fantastic job.
And I was very, very impressed.
Dale Fosdick was convicted of first degree murder, and was sentenced to 55 years in prison.
Just the fact that he thought he could get away with it, and they got him.
That's what's so great.
You can't outsmart science.
That's for sure.
I guess he's not quite as bright as he thought he was.
Fosdick narrowly escaped the death penalty because a single juror voted against it.
This is a very dangerous human being.
He never gave any kind of indication that he was sorry.
I think the only thing that he was sorry about was that he got caught.
